



(ZA) GNR.1138 of 27 October 2017:  Regulations for the South African Police Service ()
South Africa National Subordinate Legislation


National Subordinate Legislation  >  ZA Subordinate Legislation  >  S  >  South African Police Service Act, No. 68 of 1995  >  Rules and Regulations  >  Regulations

DEPARTMENT OF CIVILIAN SECRETARIAT FOR THE POLICE SERVICE

The Minister of Police has, under section 24 (1) of the South African Police Service Act, 1995 (Act No. 68 of 1995), made the regulations in the Schedule.

(Signed)

F A MBALULA

MINISTER OF POLICE

SCHEDULE
SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE EMPLOYMENT REGULATIONS, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Definitions
2. Deviations, delegations and authorisations
3. Communication with the media
4. Decision-making in case of conflict of interest
5. Record-keeping on correction of acts and omissions
CHAPTER 2 CONDUCT, FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE, ANTI-CORRUPTION AND ETHICS MANAGEMENT
Part 1  Code of Conduct
6. Adherence to Constitution and other laws
7. Relationship with public
8. Ethical conduct
9. Performance of official duties
10. Employees as candidates for elections
Part 2  Financial Disclosure
11. Definitions
12. Register of designated employees’ interests
13. Disclosure of designated employees’ interests
14. Details of interests to be disclosed
15. Confidentiality of submitted forms and register
16. Conflict of interest
Part 3  Anti-corruption and ethics management
17. Anti-corruption functions
18. Designation of ethics officers
19. Other remunerative work by employees
CHAPTER 3 PLANNING AND SERVICES DELIVERY
20. Strategic planning
21. Human resource planning
22. Human resource development
23. Service delivery improvement programme
24. Information planning and reporting
25. Information in annual report
CHAPTER 4 EMPLOYMENT MATTERS
Part 1  Creation of posts, job descriptions and job evaluation
26. Job description, job titles, CORE and OSD’s
27. Creation and filling of posts
28. Purpose of job evaluation
29. Job evaluation system
30. Grading of posts and determination of salaries
Part 2  Remuneration and other service benefits
31. Information on remuneration
32. Leave
33. Overtime
Part 3  Working environment
34. Working hours
35. Work outside working hours
36. Health and safety
37. Employee health and wellness
Part 4  Appointments and other employment matters
38. General conditions for appointment
39. Utilisation of unpaid volunteers
40. Re-appointment of former employees
41. Prohibition on the appointment of former employees dismissed for misconduct
42. Acting in higher posts
43. Determination of requirements for employment
44. Advertising
45. Appointment and promotion
46. Probationary period
47. Resignation
48. Employee records
Part 5  Performance management
49. Systems for performance management and development
50. Performance agreements
51. Performance assessment
52. Outcome and communication of assessment results
53. Managing unsatisfactory performance
54. Performance incentive and award scheme
55. Suggestions, improvement and innovations
Part 6  Training
58. Institutional arrangements regarding training, education and development
57. Occupational specific competencies and training
58. Training assistance
Part 7  Labour matters
59. Mandating and management of negotiations
60. Matters with fiscal implications
CHAPTER 5 SENIOR MANAGEMENT SERVICE (SMS)
61. Establishment of SMS
62. Composition of SMS and grading of posts
63. Flexible employment practices within a framework of uniform norms and standards
64. Handbook for SMS
65. Advertising of posts and employment equity
66. Competency based-selection
67. Nurturing of talent to sustain SMS
68. Employment contracts
69. Performance Management and Development
70. Determination of conditions of service
71. Panel for review of conditions of service of members of SMS
72. Deployment of members of SMS
73. Training and development principles
74. Standard training programmes
75. Ethics and Conduct
76. Employer-Employee Relations
77. Misconduct and Incapacity
78. Exit Management
79. Repeal of Regulations and Saving
80. Transitional arrangements
81. Short title and commencement
Annexure 1 Employment Contract for the National Commissioner
Annexure 2 Permanent Employment Contract for Members of the Senior Management Service
Annexure 3 Employment Contract for a Fixed Term or a Specific Project for Members of the Senior Management Service

CHAPTER 1   GENERAL PROVISIONS  
1.     Definitions.  

In these Regulations any word or expression bears the meaning which was assigned to it in the Act or the Public Service Act and unless the context indicates otherwise—

(a)   “competence” means the blend of knowledge, skills, behaviour and aptitude that a person can apply in the work environment, which indicates the ability of a person to meet the requirements of a specific post;
(b)   “CORE” means Code of Remuneration referred to in regulation 26 (4);
(c)   “designated groups” means designated groups as defined in section 1 of the Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act No. 55 of 1998);
(d)   “employee” means a member of the Service as defined in section 1 of the Act;
(e)   “financial year” means a financial year as defined in section 1 of the Public Finance Management Act;
(f)   “grade” means the relative value of a particular job as reflected by the job weight, which is linked to a salary level in a salary scale used in the Service;
(g)   “inherent requirements of a job” means the competence and any other requirement that an employee needs in order to carry out a job;
(h)   “job” means those basic duties, tasks, functions and responsibilities according to which one or more posts of the same grade are established;
(i)   “job weight” means a numerical value assigned to reflect selected characteristics of a job as measured by a job evaluation instrument;
(j)   “Labour Relations Act” means the Labour Relations Act, 1995 (Act No. 66 of 1995);
(k)   “Minister” means the Minister of Police;
(l)   “OSD” means occupation specific dispensation which is a dispensation for specific occupational categories and which includes a unique salary structure, a determined grading structure and job profiles, career pathing opportunities based on competencies, experience, performance and any other employment practice determined by the National Commissioner after consultation with the Minister;
(m)   “Public Finance Management Act” means the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999);
(n)   “Public Service Act” means the Public Service Act, 1994 (promulgated under Proclamation No. 103 of 1994);
(o)   “SMS” means employees appointed to a post level graded on 13 or above;
(p)   “the Act” means the South African Police Service Act, 1995 (Act No. 68 of 1995);
(q)   “these Regulations” means the South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 2017; and
(r)   “the Treasury Regulations” means the Treasury Regulations published in Government Notice No. R.225 of 15 March 2005, as may be amended from time to time, and made under section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act.
2.     Deviations, delegations and authorisations.  
(1)    The Minister may, if circumstances justify it, approve a deviation from any provision of these Regulations, and may authorise such deviation with retrospective effect for purposes of equality.
(2)    The Minister or National Commissioner respectively may delegate in writing any power conferred upon him or her in terms of these Regulations to an employee or authorise an employee in writing to perform a duty imposed upon him or her in terms of these Regulations, and may set conditions for the exercise of the power or performance of the duty.
3.     Communication with the media.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must issue official directives on how employees must communicate in the printed or other public media.
(2)    An employee must direct any enquiry on a matter that falls within the powers and duties of the Minister, to the National Commissioner.
(3)    Without derogating from the provisions of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000) an employee, in his or her official capacity, may not criticize Government policy at a public gathering, in a publication or in the printed or other public media.
4.     Decision-making in case of conflict of interest.  
(1)    If a possible conflict of interest arises in the performance of any act by any employee in terms of these Regulations, that employee may perform the act only after considering a recommendation of an independent panel consisting of at least two persons, appointed by the National Commissioner, or, if the employee is the National Commissioner, the Minister.
(2)    If that employee deviates from the recommendations of the panel, he or she must record the reasons for the deviation in writing.
(3)    An employee may not accept or seek compensation of any kind from an employee or a prospective employee in return for performing an act in terms of these Regulations.
5.     Record-keeping on correction of acts and omissions.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must keep copies of all documents relating to a power exercised in terms of section 5 (7) (a) of the Public Service Act in the personnel file of the affected employee or employees.
(2)    The Minister must submit a report in February of each year to the Minister of Public Service and Administration, regarding instances in the preceding 12 months in which he or she exercised his or her power in terms of section 5 (7) (a) of the Public Service Act. The report must at least contain the—
(a)   personal details of the affected employee or employees;
(b)   details of the act or omission that was corrected; and
(c)   the decision of the Minister.
CHAPTER 2   CONDUCT, FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE, ANTI-CORRUPTION AND ETHICS MANAGEMENT  
Part 1   Code of Conduct  
6.     Adherence to constitution and other laws.  

An employee shall—

(a)   be faithful to the Republic and honour and abide by the Constitution and all other law in the execution of his or her official duties;
(b)   put the public interest first in the execution of his or her official duties;
(c)   loyally execute the lawful policies of the Government of the day in the performance of his or her official duties;
(d)   abide by and strive to be familiar with all legislation and other lawful instructions applicable to his or her conduct and official duties; and
(e)   co-operate with public institutions established under the Constitution and legislation in promoting the interest of the public.
7.     Relationship with public.  

An employee shall—

(a)   promote the unity and well-being of the South African nation in performing his or her official duties;
(b)   serve the public in an unbiased and impartial manner in order to create confidence in the public service;
(c)   be polite, helpful and reasonably accessible in his or her dealings with the public;
(d)   have regard for the circumstances and concerns of the public in performing his or her official duties and in the making of decisions affecting them;
(e)   be committed through timely service to the development and upliftment of all South Africans;
(f)   not abuse his or her position in the public service to promote or prejudice the interest of any political party or interest group;
(g)   respect and protect the dignity of every person and his or her rights as contained in the Constitution; and
(h)   recognise the public’s right of access to information, excluding information that is specifically protected by law.
8.     Ethical conduct.  

An employee shall—

(a)   not receive, solicit or accept any gratification, as defined in section 1 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 2004 (Act No. 12 of 2004), from any employee or any person in return for performing or not performing his or her official duties;
(b)   not engage in any transaction or action that is in conflict with or infringes on the execution of his or her official duties;
(c)   not conduct business with any organ of state or be a director of a public or private company conducting business with an organ of state, unless such employee is in an official capacity a director of a company listed in schedule 2 and 3 of the Public Finance Management Act;
(d)   recuse herself or himself from any official action or decision-making process which may result in improper personal gain, and this shall immediately be properly declared by the employee;
(e)   immediately report to the relevant authorities, fraud, corruption, nepotism, maladministration and any other act which constitutes a contravention of any law (including, but not limited to, a criminal offence) or which is prejudicial to the interest of the public, which comes to his or her attention during the course of his or her employment in the public service;
(f)   refrain from favouring relatives and friends in work-related activities and not abuse his or her authority or influence another employee, nor be influenced to abuse his or her authority;
(g)   not use or disclose any official information for personal gain or the gain of others;
(h)   not receive or accept any gift from any person in the course and scope of his or her employment, other than from a family member, to the cumulative value of R350 per year, unless prior approval is obtained from the Minister;
(i)   if he or she has permission in terms of section 30 of the Public Service Act to perform outside remunerative work, not—
(i)   perform such work during official work hours; and
(ii)   use official equipment or state resources for such work.
(j)   deal fairly, professionally and equitably with all other employees or members of the public, irrespective of race, gender, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, political persuasion, conscience, belief, culture or language; and
(k)   refrain from party political activities in the workplace.
9.     Performance of official duties.  

An employee shall—

(a)   strive to achieve the objectives of his or her institution cost-effectively and in the interest of the public;
(b)   be creative in thought and in the execution of his or her official duties, seek innovative ways to solve problems and enhance effectiveness and efficiency within the context of the law;
(c)   be punctual in the execution of his or her official duties;
(d)   execute his or her official duties in a professional and competent manner;
(e)   co-operate fully with other employees to advance the interest of the public;
(f)   be honest and accountable in dealing with public funds and use the State’s property and other resources effectively, efficiently, and only for authorised official purposes;
(g)   use the appropriate mechanisms to deal with his or her grievances or to direct representations;
(h)   be committed to the optimal development, motivation and utilisation of employees reporting to him or her and the promotion of sound labour and interpersonal relations;
(i)   avail himself or herself for training and development;
(j)   promote sound, efficient, effective, transparent and accountable administration;
(k)   give honest and impartial advice, based on all available relevant information, in the execution of his or her official duties;
(l)   honour the confidentiality of official matters, documents and discussions;
(m)   not release official information to the public unless he or she has the necessary approval;
(n)   when on official duty, dress and behave in a manner that is befitting of a public service employee;
(o)   not consume alcoholic beverages or any other non-medicinal substance with an intoxicating effect while on duty or shall not report for duty under such influence;
(p)   not misrepresent himself or herself or use the name or position of any other employee or person to unduly or improperly influence any decision making process or obtain any undue benefit; and
(q)   shall immediately report any non-compliance of the Act to the National Commissioner.
10.     Employees as candidates for elections.  
(1)    An employee who is issued with a certificate in terms of section 31 (3) of the Electoral Act, 1998 (Act No. 73 of 1998), stating that he or she is a candidate in an election, shall, not later than the next working day, inform his or her National Commissioner in writing thereof and submit a copy of the certificate.
(2)    The employee shall be deemed to be on annual leave from the date following the date the certificate is so issued until, if he or she is—
(a)   elected and accepts election, the date immediately before the date he or she assumes office;
(b)   elected, but declines election, the date that he or she declines election; or
(c)   not elected, the date of the designation of representatives in terms of item 16 to Schedule 1A to the Electoral Act, 1998.
(3)    If the employee has insufficient annual leave, he or she shall be deemed to be on unpaid leave for the period in question.
Part 2   Financial Disclosure  
11.     Definitions.  

In this Part, unless the context indicates otherwise—

designated employee”    means—
(a)   the National Commissioner or any other employee occupying a post on grade 13 or higher in the Service;
(b)   any other person in terms of section 36 (3) of the Public Finance Management Act approved or instructed by the relevant treasury to be the accounting officer of a department;
(c)   any other employee or category of employees in the Service determined by the Minister;
“form”    means a printed or electronic form contemplated in regulation 13;
“interests”    means the financial interests listed in regulation 14; “register” means the register of financial interests kept in terms of regulation 12; and “remuneration” means any payment or benefit in cash or in kind.
12.     Register of designated employees’ interests.  
(1)    The Director-General: Office of the Commission shall keep a register of designated employees’ interests, who are members of the SMS.
(2)    The National Commissioner shall keep a register of any other designated employees’ interests not contemplated in subregulation (1).
13.     Disclosure of designated employees’ interests.  
(1)    Every designated employee, except for the National Commissioner shall, not later than 30 April of each year, disclose to the Minister, in a form prescribed for this purpose by the Public Service Commission, particulars of all his or her registrable interests in respect of the period 1 April of the previous year to 31 March of the year in question.
(2)    The National Commissioner shall, not later than 30 April of each year, disclose to the Minister, in the form prescribed for this purpose by the Public Service Commission , particulars of all his or her interests in respect of the period 1 April of the previous year to 31 March of the year in question.
(3)    Any person who assumes duty as a designated employee on or after 1 April in a year shall make such disclosure within 30 days after assumption of duty in respect of the period from 1 April to date of disclosure.
(4)    The National Commissioner or the Minister, as the case may be, shall ensure that the disclosure of interests by designated employees is submitted electronically to the Public Service Commission, unless otherwise determined by the Minister.
(5)    The Minister shall submit to the Public Service Commission a copy of the form submitted to the executive authority in terms of—
(a)   subregulation (2) not later than 31 May of the year in question; or
(b)   subregulation (4), in so far as it relates to a National Commissioner, not later than 30 days after it has been so submitted.
(6)    The National Commissioner shall submit to the Public Service Commission a copy of the form submitted by a designated employee in terms of—
(a)   subregulation (1) not later than 31 May of the year in question; or
(b)   subregulation (4), in so far as it relates to a member of the SMS, excluding a National Commissioner, not later than 30 days after it has been so submitted.
14.     Details of interests to be disclosed.  

The following details of interests shall be disclosed—

(a)   Shares, loan accounts or any other form of equity in a registered private or public companies and other corporate entities recognised by law—
(i)   The number, nature and nominal value of shares of any type in any public or private company and its name; and
(ii)   other forms of equity, loan accounts, and any other financial interests owned by an individual or held in any other corporate entity and its name.
(b)   Income-generating assets—
(i)   A description of the income-generating asset;
(ii)   the nature of the income; and
(iii)   the amount or value of income received.
(c)   Trusts—
(i)   The name of the trust, trust reference or registration number as provided by the Master of the High Court, and the region where the trust is registered;
(ii)   the purpose of the trust, and your interest or role in the trust; and
(iii)   the benefits or remuneration received (these include fees charged for services rendered).
(d)   Directorships and partnerships—
(i)   The name, type and nature of business activity of the corporate entity or partnership; and
(ii)   if applicable, the amount of any remuneration received for such directorship or partnership.
(e)   Remunerated work outside the employee’s employment in her or his department—
(i)   The type of work;
(ii)   the name, type and nature of business activity of the employer;
(iii)   the amount of the remuneration received for such work; and
(iv)   proof of compliance with section 30 of the Act must be attached.
(f)   Consultancies and retainerships—
(i)   The nature of the consultancy or retainership of any kind;
(ii)   the name, type and nature of business activity of the client concerned; and
(iii)   the value of any benefits received for such consultancy or retainership.
(g)   Sponsorships—
(i)   The source and description of direct financial sponsorship or assistance;
(ii)   the relationship between the sponsor and the employee;
(iii)   the relationship between the sponsor and the department; and
(iv)   the value of the sponsorship or assistance.
(h)   Gifts and hospitality from a source, other than a family member—
(i)   A description, value and source of a gift;
(ii)   the relationship between the giver and the employee;
(iii)   the relationship between the giver and the department; and
(iv)   a description and the value of any hospitality intended as a gift in kind.
(i)   Ownership and other interests in immovable property—
(i)   A description and extent of the land or property;
(ii)   the area in which it is situated;
(iii)   the purchase price, date of purchase and the outstanding bond on the property; and
(iv)   the estimated market value of the property.
(j)   Vehicles—
(i)   A description (make and model) of the vehicle;
(ii)   the registration number of the vehicle; and
(iii)   the purchase price, date of purchase and the outstanding amount owing on the vehicle.
15.     Confidentiality of submitted forms and register.  
(1)    Subject to subregulation (3), only the following persons have access to a submitted form or the register—
(a)   The Minister;
(b)   National Commissioner;
(c)   the commander to whom the form is submitted;
(d)   Commissioners of the Commission;
(e)   The Director-General: Office of the Public Service Commission;
(f)   The Director-General: Public Service and Administration;
(g)   The relevant designated ethics officer as contemplated in regulation 18; and
(h)   such other persons designated by the Minister, National Commissioner or the chairperson of the Commission for purposes of record keeping and the effective implementation of this Part.
(2)    No person who has access to a submitted form or the register may, except when a court so orders, disclose any information in that form or register to anyone other than—
(a)   a designated employee in respect of his or her submitted form or an entry in the register in respect of that employee; or
(b)   another person who is permitted access in terms of subregulation (1) or to whom access is granted in accordance with subregulation (3).
(3)    Any person, other than a person contemplated in subregulation (1), may only be given access to a submitted form or the register in terms of section 11 of the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No. 2 of 2000).
16.     Conflict of interest.  
(1)    In so far as conflict of interest relates to members of the SMS—
(a)   The Public Service Commission shall verify the interests disclosed.
(b)   If the Public Service Commission is of the opinion that an interest of a designated employee disclosed in terms of regulation 13 conflicts or is likely to conflict with the execution of any official duty of that employee, it shall verify the information regarding that interest and refer the matter back to the Minister.
(c)   Upon the referral, the Minister shall consult with the employee concerned on appropriate steps to remove the conflict of interest.
(d)   If the employee, after the consultation referred to in subregulation (1) (c), fails to take the appropriate steps to remove the conflict of interest, the Minister shall instruct the National Commissioner to take disciplinary action against the employee.
(e)   The Minister shall, within 30 days after such referral, report to the Commission by—
(i)   stating whether any steps were taken; and
(ii)   if steps were taken, giving a description of those steps or providing reasons if no steps were taken.
(2)    In so far as conflict of interest relates to designated employees who are not members of the SMS—
(a)   The National Commissioner shall verify the interests disclosed.
(b)   If the National Commissioner is of the opinion that an interest of such designated employee disclosed in terms of regulation 13 conflicts or is likely to conflict with the execution of any official duty of that employee, he or she shall consult the employee concerned and, where possible, take appropriate steps to remove the conflict of interest.
(c)   If the employee, after the consultation referred to in subregulation (2) (b), fails to take the appropriate steps to remove the conflict of interest, the National Commissioner shall take disciplinary action against the employee.
(d)   The National Commissioner shall no later than 31 August of each year report to the Minister on—
(i)   the number of cases identified in terms of subregulation (2) (b);
(ii)   whether any steps were taken;
(iii)   whether steps were taken, a description of those steps; and
(iv)   reasons where no steps have been taken.
Part 3   Anti-Corruption and Ethics Management  
17.     Anti-corruption and ethics functions.  

The National Commissioner shall—

(a)   analyse ethics and corruption risks as part of the department’s system of risk management;
(b)   develop and implement an ethics management strategy that prevents and deters unethical conduct and acts of corruption;
(c)   establish a system that encourages and allows employees and citizens to report allegations of corruption and other unethical conduct, and such system shall provide for—
(i)   confidentiality of reporting; and
(ii)   the recording of all allegations of corruption and unethical conduct received through the system or systems;
(d)   establish an information system that—
(i)   records all allegations of corruption and unethical conduct;
(ii)   monitors the management of the allegations of corruption and unethical conduct;
(iii)   identifies any systemic weaknesses and recurring risks; and
(iv)   maintains records of the outcomes of the allegations of corruption and unethical conduct; and
(e)   refer allegations of corruption to the relevant law enforcement agency and investigate whether disciplinary steps must be taken against any employee of the department and if so, institute such disciplinary action.
18.     Designation of ethics officers.  
(1)    The National Commissioner shall designate such number of ethics officers as may be appropriate, for the Service to—
(a)   promote integrity and ethical behaviour in the Service;
(b)   advise employees on ethical matters;
(c)   identify and report unethical behaviour and corrupt activities to the National Commissioner;
(d)   manage the financial disclosure system; and
(e)   manage the processes and systems relating to remunerative work performed by employees outside their employment in the Service.
(2)    The National Commissioner shall establish an ethics committee or designate an existing committee, chaired by a Lieutenant-General, to provide oversight on ethics management in the Service.
19.     Other remunerative work by employees.  

An application by an employee to perform remunerative work outside the Service shall be in accordance with the process determined by the National Commissioner and in the form issued by the Minister.

CHAPTER 3   PLANNING AND SERVICE DELIVERY  
20.     Strategic planning.  
(1)    The Minister must prepare a strategic plan for the Service—
(a)   stating the core objectives of the Service, based on Constitutional and other legislative mandates, functional mandates and the service delivery improvement programme mentioned in regulation 23;
(b)   describing the core and support activities necessary to achieve the core objectives, avoiding duplication of functions;
(c)   describing the targets to be attained in the medium term;
(d)   setting out a programme for attaining those targets;
(e)   specifying information systems that—
(i)   enable him or her to monitor the progress made towards achieving those goals, targets and core objectives;
(ii)   support compliance with the reporting requirements in regulation 25 and the National Minimum Information Requirements, referred to in regulation 49;
(f)   including a summary of the outcome of the processes referred to in subregulation (2) in the strategic plan of the Service; and
(g)   complying with the requirements in paragraphs 5.1 and 5,2 of the Treasury Regulations.
(2)    Based on the strategic plan of the Service, the National Commissioner must with the concurrence of the Minister—
(a)   determine the organisational structure of the Service in terms of its core and support functions;
(b)   define the posts necessary to perform the relevant functions while remaining within the current budget and medium-term expenditure framework of the Service, and the posts so defined, constitute the fixed establishment of the Service;
(c)   grade proposed new jobs or newly defined jobs according to the job evaluation system referred to in regulation 29 except where the grade of a job has been determined in terms of an OSD; and
(d)   engage in human resource planning in accordance with regulation 21 with a view to meeting the resulting human resource needs.
(3)    In implementing the strategic plan, the National Commissioner must—
(a)   promote the efficient, economic and effective use of resources so as to improve the functioning of the Service; and
(b)   to that end, apply working methods such as the re-allocation, simplification, purification and co- ordination of work, and eliminate unnecessary functions.
21.     Human resource planning.  
(1)    In preparing a human resources plan for the Service, the National Commissioner with the Minister’s concurrence must—
(a)   assess the human resources necessary to perform the functions of the Service, with particular reference to—
(i)   the number of employees required;
(ii)   the competencies and proficiency levels that those employees must possess;
(iii)   the capacities (whether permanent or temporary) in which those employees must be appointed;
(iv)   the staffing patterns; and
(v)   the training and development interventions required;
(b)   assess existing human resources by race, gender, disability, age and any other relevant criteria as well as by occupational category, organisational component and grade with reference to their—
(i)   competencies and proficiencies;
(ii)   training and development needs; and
(iii)   employment capacities;
(c)   identify gaps between what is required under subregulation (1) (a) and (b), and prioritise interventions to address the identified gaps; and
(d)   plan within the available budgeted funds, including funds for the remaining period of the relevant medium-term expenditure framework, for the recruitment, retention, deployment and development of human resources according to the requirements of the Service determined in terms of subregulation (1) (a), which plan must, as a minimum, include—
(i)   realistic goals and measurable targets for achieving representativeness, taking into account subregulation (3); and
(ii)   targets for the training and development of employees per occupational category and of specific employees, as well as specific plans to meet the training needs and development of designated groups.
(2)    The National Commissioner must—
(i)   monitor and evaluate compliance with subregulation (1);
(ii)   report to the Minister thereon; and
(iii)   submit a copy of the report to the Secretary for Police Service to conduct statutory civilian oversight over the Service.
(3)    The Minister must report to the Minister of Public Service and Administration on an annual basis regarding compliance with subregulation (1).
(4)    The National Commissioner must develop and implement an affirmative action programme, which must contain, as a minimum, the following—
(a)   a policy statement that sets out the commitment of the Service to affirmative action and how that policy will be implemented;
(b)   numeric and time-bound targets for achieving representativeness;
(c)   annual statistics on the appointment and training within each grade of each occupational category of designated groups; and
(d)   a plan for redressing numeric under-representativeness and supporting the advancement of designated groups.
(5)    The National Commissioner must make the outcome of planning referred to in subregulation (1) and the affirmative action programme referred to in subregulation (4) known within the Service.
22.     Human resource development.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must on an annual basis, submit for approval a human resource development implementation plan for the Service to the Minister.
(2)    The National Commissioner must submit a copy of the human resources development implementation plan to the Secretary for Police Service to conduct statutory civilian oversight over the Service.
(3)    The Minister must on an annual basis, submit a human resource development implementation plan for the Service to the Minister of Public Service and Administration.
23.     Service delivery improvement programme.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must establish and maintain a service delivery improvement programme for the Service—
(a)   specifying the main services to be provided to the different types of actual and potential service recipients, as identified by the Service;
(b)   containing consultation arrangements with the actual and potential service recipients of the Service;
(c)   with due regard to the means of access of the service user to the services and the barriers to increased access thereof, specifying the mechanisms or strategies to be utilised progressively to remove the barriers to increased access to services;
(d)   indicating standards for the main services to be provided;
(e)   containing arrangements as to how information about the services of the Service are to be provided; and
(f)   stipulating a system or mechanisms for complaints.
(2)    The National Commissioner must submit a service delivery improvement plan to the Minister and submit a copy of the plan to Secretary for Police Service to conduct civilian oversight over the Service.
(3)    The National Commissioner must publish an annual statement which sets out the service standards of the Service that members of the public can expect and which will serve to explain how the Service will meet each of the standards.
24.     Information planning and reporting.  

The national commissioner must establish—

(a)   an information plan for the Service that supports—
(i)   the planning process and objectives contemplated in regulation 20; and
(ii)   compliance with Chapter 6 of the Public Service Regulations, 2016;
(b)   an information infrastructure plan that supports the information plan; and
(c)   an operational plan that enables the implementation of the information infrastructure plan and information management.
25.     Information in annual report.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must include in the annual report of the Service, referred to in section 40 (1) (d) of the Public Finance Management Act, such information pertaining to any matter referred to in section 3 (1) of the Public Service Act, including, but not limited to, the utilisation of consultants, as the Minister may direct, and in the format that the Minister may direct.
(2)    The Minister must immediately after he or she has tabled the annual report in Parliament in terms of section 65 (1) of the Public Finance Management Act, submit it to the National Treasury, make it available on the website of the Service and, on request, make it available free of charge to any member of the media or the public.
(3)    In this regulation “consultant” means a natural or juristic person or a partnership that provides, in terms of a specific contract, on an ad hoc basis, any of the following professional services to the Service against remuneration received from any source—
(a)   the rendering of expert advice;
(b)   the drafting of proposals for the execution of specific tasks; and
(c)   the executing of a specific task which is of a technical or intellectual nature, but excludes an employee of the Public Service.
CHAPTER 4   EMPLOYMENT MATTERS  
Part 1   Creation of Posts, Job Descriptions and Job Evaluation  
26.     Job descriptions, job titles, CORE’S and OSD’S.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must establish a job description and job title for each post or group of posts, that indicate, with appropriate emphasis on service delivery—
(a)   the main objectives of the post or posts in question; and
(b)   the inherent requirements of the job.
(2)    At least once every five years, the National Commissioner must review job descriptions and titles and, where necessary, redefine them to ensure that they remain appropriate and accurate.
(3)    The National Commissioner may, from time to time, after consultation with the Minister, establish an OSD for an occupation.
(4)    The National Commissioner must, in designing job and career paths linked to the salary scales, from time to time, after consultation with the Minister, determine—
(a)   occupational categories (COREs) for which an OSD has not been determined; and
(b)   an occupational classification system.
(5)    The National Commissioner may determine norms and standards on the objectives, contents and requirements of categories of jobs.
(6)    The National Commissioner must link all posts in the Service to a relevant CORE and an occupation listed in the occupational classification system, except in the case of posts determined in terms of an OSD, in which case the classification indicated in the OSD, must be utilised.
27.     Creation and filling of posts.  

Before creating a post for any newly defined job, or filling any vacancy, after consultation with the Minister, the National Commissioner must—

(a)   confirm that he or she requires the post to meet the objectives of the Service;
(b)   in the case of a new or newly defined job, evaluate the job in terms of the job evaluation system except in the case of jobs determined in terms of an OSD, in which case the classification indicated in the OSD must be utilised;
(c)   in the case of a vacant post, not determined in terms of an OSD, evaluate the job unless the specific job has been evaluated in the last 5 years;
(d)   ensure that sufficient budgeted funds, including funds for the remaining period of the medium-term expenditure framework, are available for filling the post; and
(e)   Submit a report to the Minister on matters referred to in sub-paragraphs (a) to (d) for the Minister’s information and any directions that the Minister may issue.
28.     Purpose of job evaluation.  

To ensure that work of equal value is remunerated equally, the Service must increasingly use job evaluation—

(a)   to assist in achieving cost-effective work organisation; and
(b)   to determine appropriate remuneration.
29.     Job evaluation system.  
(1)    The Minister must determine—
(a)   a job evaluation system or systems that must be utilised in the Service;
(b)   a range of job weights derived from the system or systems for each salary level in a salary scale;
(c)   a job or category of jobs that the National Commissioner must evaluate.
(2)    The Minister may—
(a)   review the application of job evaluation in the Service;
(b)   issue directives on the application of job evaluation system or systems;
(c)   evaluate and grade any job; or
(d)   direct the National Commissioner to take measures to enhance the quality of the system, including the re-evaluation of jobs, the restructuring of the component responsible for job evaluation or further training of employees responsible for job evaluation in the Service.
(3)    The National Commissioner may evaluate or re-evaluate any job in the Service; Provided that the evaluation or re-evaluation of any job in the SMS is conducted with the Minister’s concurrence.
30.     Grading of posts and determination of salaries.  
(1)    This regulation does not apply to a post determined in terms of an OSD, unless the OSD determines otherwise.
(2)    The National Commissioner must determine the grade of a post to correspond with its job weight except in the case of a post in respect of which the National Commissioner, after consultation with the Minister, determined the grade in terms of regulation 29 (2) (c), and set the commencing salary of an employee on the minimum notch of the salary level attached to the relevant grade, unless the salary proves inadequate under the criteria in subregulation (4).
(3)    If the National Commissioner plans to evaluate posts or implement job evaluation results that will affect the grading of an occupation or salary level within an occupation that is utilised by more than one department, he or she must do so in consultation with the Minister who must consult the Minister of Public Service and Administration.
(4)    If a job has a weight that applies to more than one salary level, the National Commissioner must determine which of the relevant salary levels to use.
(5)    The National Commissioner may set the salary for a post or an employee above the salary level indicated by the job weight, if he or she—
(a)   has evaluated the job, but cannot recruit or retain an employee with the necessary competencies at the salary indicated by the job weight; and
(b)   recorded the reason why the salary indicated by the job weight, was insufficient.
(6)    If the job weight demonstrates that a filled post is overgraded or undergraded, the National Commissioner must either effect changes to the work organisation or regrade the post according to the job weight and the relevant collective agreements.
(7)    The National Commissioner may, with the concurrence of the Minister, increase the salary of a post to a higher salary level in order to accord with the job weight, if—
(a)   the job weight as measured by the job evaluation system indicates that the post was graded incorrectly; and
(b)   the budget of the Service and the medium-term expenditure framework provide sufficient funds.
(8)    If the National Commissioner increases the salary of a post as provided under subregulation (7), he or she must transfer the incumbent employee to another post that accords with the salary level of the employee and advertise the vacant post at the higher salary level:

Provided that the National Commissioner may, with the concurrence of the Minister, continue to employ the incumbent employee in the higher-graded post without advertising the post if—

(a)   the incumbent already performs the duties of the post;
(b)   the incumbent has received a satisfactory rating in his or her most recent performance assessment; and
(c)   it will be in the interest of the Service.
(9)    If the National Commissioner decides to continue to employ the incumbent employee in the higher- graded post without advertising the post—
(a)   the absorption of the incumbent employee in the higher-graded post as provided under subregulation (8), must take effect on the first day of the month following the month during which the National Commissioner approved that absorption; and
(b)   the salary of the employee must be adjusted to the minimum notch of the higher salary level with effect from the date referred to in subparagraph (a).
(10)    As far as possible, the National Commissioner must set the salary of a permanent or a temporary employee employed in a part-time capacity proportional to the salary of an equally graded full-time employee.
Part 2   Remuneration and other Service Benefits  
31.     Information on remuneration.  
(1)    The Minister must, at least on an annual basis, issue and publish the salary scale or scales used in the Service.
(2)    The National Commissioner must respect the right to privacy of an employee in dealing with personnel matters and the remuneration of an individual employee.
(3)    The National Commissioner must provide an employee, in the week before his or her salary pay day, in writing with information mentioning—
(a)   the fact that the employee is employed by the Service;
(b)   the name of the employee;
(c)   the job title of the employee and the occupational category in terms of the CORE;
(d)   the salary notch of the employee;
(e)   any other form of compensation that the Service pays directly to the employee on a monthly basis;
(f)   the period for which payment is made;
(g)   the amount and purpose of any deductions; and
(h)   the actual amount paid to the employee.
32.     Leave.  

The National Commissioner must—

(1) (a) encourage an employee to fully utilise his or her annual leave in the leave cycle earned;

(b) record all leave taken by an employee accurately and in full; and

(c) ensure that an employee does not abuse sick leave, including sports-leave.

(2) The National Commissioner must submit to the Minister, for information purposes, a quarterly report on the annual leave plan for the leave cycle of every member of the Service from the level brigadier up to the level of Lieutenant – General.

(3) The report contemplated in sub-regulation (2) must be submitted to the Minister at least 30 days before a member’s leave is approved by the relevant manager of the member.

(4) The National Commissioner must ensure that, in considering any application for leave, the operations of the Service will not be negatively affected by the granting of leave to such member.

(5) The National Commissioner must, before approving application for annual leave by Lieutenant- General consult with the Minister.

(6) The Minister may request the National Commissioner to provide such information as may be necessary on the management of leave of the members referred to sub-regulation (2) to ensure that the operations of the Service are not negatively affected.

33.     Overtime.  
(1)    The National Commissioner may compensate an employee for overtimework if—
(a)   the Service has a written policy on overtime;
(b)   he or she has provided written authorisation in advance for the work; and
(c)   the monthly compensation for overtime constitutes less than 30 percent, or the percentage determined by the National Commissioner, of the monthly salary of the employee, unless exceptional circumstances justifies a higher percentage.
(2)    The National Commissioner must establish an overtime policy in accordance with collective agreements, which must determine—
(a)   categories of employees that may not receive compensation for overtime due to the nature of their work and responsibilities;
(b)   the circumstances under which a commander may authorise overtime work for an individual employee;
(c)   if an employee must receive payment or time off as compensation for authorised overtime;
(d)   how much overtime an employee may work in a given period;
(e)   how a commander must record authorisation for overtime; and
(f)   other control measures, if necessary.
Part 3   Working Environment  
34.     Working Hours.  

The National Commissioner must determine—

(a)   the work week and daily hours of work for employees; and
(b)   the opening and closing times of places of work under his or her control, taking into account—
(i)   the needs of the public in the context of the service delivery improvement programme of the Service; and
(ii)   the needs and circumstances of employees, including family obligations and transport arrangements.
35.     Work outside working hours.  

The National Commissioner may, if he or she deems it in the interest of the Service, instruct an employee to perform the functions of the Service outside normal working hours, in order to—

(a)   prevent, combat and investigate crime;
(b)   maintain public order;
(c)   protect and secure the inhabitants of the Republic and their property; and
(d)   uphold and enforce the law.
36.     Health and safety.  

The National Commissioner must establish and maintain a safe and healthy work environment for employees of the Service.

37.     Employee health and wellness.  

The National Commissioner must develop a policy or policies that promote the health and well-being of employees.

Part 4   Appointments and other Employment Matters  
38.     General conditions for appointment.  
(1)    The National Commissioner—
(a)   may not appoint any person under the age of 16 years;
(b)   must determine the health requirements for incumbency of a post, in any case where it is a requirement of the post;
(c)   must require an employee or a candidate for employment to be subjected to pre-employment checks for suitability or security clearance, as the case may be;
(d)   must ensure that each person, upon appointment, is provided with a letter of appointment, including the terms and conditions of his or her service; and
(e)   may not appoint a temporary employee into a permanent post in the Service without complying with regulations 44 and 45.
(2)    The National Commissioner may, within the available budget and subject to the job being evaluated in terms of the job evaluation system, employ persons additional to the fixed establishment, where—
(a)   the incumbent of a post is expected to be absent for such a period that his or her duties cannot be performed by other personnel;
(b)   a temporary increase in work occurs; or
(c)   it is necessary for any other reason to temporarily increase the staff of the Service.
(3)    The National Commissioner may appoint a person to a vacant post in the fixed establishment of the Service if—
(a)   sufficient budgeted funds, including funds for the remaining period of the relevant medium-term expenditure framework are available for filling the vacancy; and
(b)   the vacancy has been advertised and the candidate selected in accordance with regulations 44 and 45.
(4)    An appointment may only take effect after approval by the National Commissioner, except where the post is on the level 13 to 15 the concurrence of the Minister must be obtained.
39.     Utilisation of unpaid volunteers.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must determine the rules in accordance with which unpaid volunteers may be utilized by the Service.
(2)    The rules determined by the National Commissioner must as a minimum determine—
(a)   the categories of volunteers that may be utilized by the Service and the purposes for which they may be utilized;
(b)   the expenses incurred by a volunteer which will be reimbursed by the Service and the conditions for such reimbursement; and
(c)   that a volunteer must, at all times, perform work or duties in the Service under the supervision of an employee.
40.     Re-appointment of former employees.  
(1)    The National Commissioner may not re-appoint a former employee if—
(a)   the former employee left the public service earlier on the condition that he or she would not accept or seek re-appointment; or
(b)   the former employee left the public service due to ill health and cannot provide recent and conclusive evidence of recovery.
(2)    Notwithstanding subregulation (1), the National Commissioner may, after concurrence of the Minister, appoint a former employee referred to in that regulation if—
(a)   the appointment is in the public interest;
(b)   the appointment is made in accordance with the recruitment and selection procedures in these Regulations and no other suitable candidate could be recruited;
(c)   the appointment is made for a fixed term not exceeding three years, and that term may be extended only once for a further term not exceeding three years; and
(d)   the employee has not previously been appointed in terms of this regulation.
41.     Prohibition on the appointment of former employees dismissed for misconduct.  

A former employee of the public service or the Service, dismissed, from the public service or the Service for any form of misconduct, may only be appointed in the Service if the National Commissioner, after having considered the facts surrounding the dismissal and obtained the concurrence of the Minister, approves the appointment of such person.

42.     Acting in higher posts.  
(1)    The National Commissioner may appoint an employee to act in a higher vacant post: Provided that where the vacant post is that of a Lieutenant General, with the exception of the post of the National Commissioner or a Provincial Commissioner, the acting appointment must be done with the concurrence of the Minister and subject to terms and conditions determined by the Minister.
(2)    The National Commissioner may, with the concurrence of the Minister, compensate an employee for acting in a higher vacant post in accordance with an agreement reached in the collective bargaining process.
(3)    An employee may not act in a higher vacant post for an uninterrupted period exceeding twelve months.
43.     Determination of requirements for employment.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must determine composite requirements for employment in any post on the basis of the main objectives and inherent requirements of the job.
(2)    The National Commissioner must—
(a)   record the inherent requirements of a job;
(b)   ensure that the requirements for employment do not unfairly discriminate against any person; and
(c)   comply with any statutory requirement for the appointment of employees.
(3)    The National Commissioner may not, without the concurrence of the Minister, appoint a foreign national, unless he or she has permanent residence in the Republic of South Africa.
44.     Advertising.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must ensure that vacant posts in the Service are advertised so as to reach, as efficiently and effectively as possible, the entire pool of potential applicants, especially designated groups.
(2)    An advertisement for a post must specify the inherent requirements of the job, the job title and core functions.
(3)    Any vacant post in the SMS must be advertised nationally, simultaneously inside and outside the Service.
(4)    The National Commissioner must advertise any other vacant post as a minimum within the Province or Division concerned, but may also advertise such post—
(a)   in the Service as a whole;
(b)   elsewhere in the public service; or
(c)   outside the public service either nationally or locally.
(5)    A funded vacant post must be advertised within six months after becoming vacant and be filled within 12 months after becoming vacant.
(6)    If the Service does not comply with subregulation (5), the reasons for the noncompliance must be recorded in writing.
(7)    The National Commissioner may fill a vacant post without complying with subregulations (3) and (4), if—
(a)   the Service can fill the post from the ranks of supernumerary staff of equal grading;
(b)   the Service can absorb into the post an employee who was appointed under an affirmative action programme referred to in regulation 21 (4), if the employee meets the requirements of the post;
(c)   the Service plans to fill the post as part of a programme of laterally rotating or transferring employees to enhance organisational effectiveness and skills; or
(d)   the post is to be filled through a transfer in terms of section 12 (3) or 14 of the Public Service Act.
(8)    The National Commissioner may utilise an appropriate employment or recruitment agency to identify candidates for posts, as long as the advertising and selection procedures comply with this regulation and regulation 46.
45.     Appointment and promotion.  

For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definition is inserted—

“selected posts of the SMS”    means posts In the Service from the level of Brigadier up to the level of Lieutenant- General (Deputy National Commissioner) and includes the posts of a—
(a)   Lieutenant-General (Divisional Commissioner, excluding a Provincial Commissioner); and
(b)   Lieutenant-General (Deputy National Commissioner).
(1)    
(a)    The National Commissioner must, with the concurrence of the Minister, appoint a selection committee to make recommendations on appointments or promotions to selected posts of the senior management service as contemplated in subregulation (11). A selection committee must consist of persons of a grading equal to or higher than the grading of the post to be filled.
(b)    The selection panel for the post of Lieutenant-General (Divisional Commissioner, but excluding a Provincial Commissioner), as well as Lieutenant-General (Deputy-National Commissioner) must consist of at least three members who are Directors-General of public service departments, as well as the delegate of the National Commissioner who must of a grading equal to or higher than the grading of the post to be filled.
(c)    The selection panel for the post of a Brigadier must consist of at least three members of public service departments on the level of Chief Director, as well as the delegate of the National Commissioner who must of a grading equal to or higher than the grading of the post to be filled.
(d)    The chairperson of the selection committee must be appointed by the National Commissioner with the concurrence of the Minister.
(e)    in the event that the head of the component within which the vacant post is located, is graded lower than the vacant post, such a head may be delegated to be a member of the selection committee.
(f)    A selection committee must, where reasonably possible, include adequate representation from designated groups.
(g)    Employees of a grading which is lower than the grading of the post to be filled may provide secretarial or advisory services during the selection process, but may not form part of the selection committee, except where the selection is done in terms of subregulation (e).
(h)    The selection committee must make a recommendation on the suitability of a candidate after considering only—
(i)   information based on valid methods, criteria or instruments for selection that are free from any bias or discrimination;
(ii)   the training, skills, competence and knowledge necessary to meet the inherent requirements of the job;
(iii)   the needs of the Service for developing human resources;
(iv)   the representativeness of the component where the post is located; and
(v)   the affirmative action programme of the Service.
(i)    A selection committee must record the reasons for its recommendation with reference to the criteria mentioned in subregulation (h).
(j)    The selection committee must submit its report and recommendations to the National Commissioner, and simultaneously submit a copy thereof to the Minister.
(k)    Before making a decision on an appointment or promotion, the National Commissioner must do so with the concurrence of the Minister and after—
(i)   satisfying himself or herself that the candidate qualifies in all respects for the post and that his or her claims in his or her application for the post have been verified;
(ii)   ensuring that the candidate has successfully undergone and passed security vetting; and
(iii)   recording all verifications in writing.
(l)    When the National Commissioner does not approve a recommendation of a selection committee, he or she must record the reasons for his or her decision in writing.
(m)    Subject to the concurrence of the Minister, the National Commissioner may promote an employee to a vacant post in the fixed establishment of the Service if—
(i)   such a vacancy is sufficiently funded; and
(ii)   the vacancy has been advertised and the candidate selected in accordance with regulations 43, 44 and these subregulations.
(n)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subregulation (m) (ii), the National Commissioner may, upon written motivation and with the concurrence of the Minister, promote an employee into a post without advertising the post, and without following the selection process, if—
(i)   the National Commissioner is satisfied that—
(aa)   the employee qualifies in all respects for the post;
(bb)   there are exceptional circumstances that warrant the deviation from the said subregulation;
(cc)   such deviation is in the interest of Service; and
(ii)   such promotion has been recommended by the Minister for outstanding performance.
(iii)   the National Commissioner has recorded the reasons for the deviation in writing.
(o)    A promotion may not come into effect before the first day of the month following the date on which the National Commissioner approved it.
(p)    No employee has any right to a promotion until the promotion has been approved in writing by the National Commissioner, after having first obtained the concurrence of the Minister.
(2)    
(a)    The National Commissioner must appoint selection committees for posts other than selected members of the senior management service, to make recommendations on appointments or promotions to posts. A selection committee must consist of at least three members who are employees of a grading equal to or higher than the grading of the post to be filled or suitable persons from outside the Service: Provided that—
(i)   the chairperson of the selection committee, who must be an employee, must be of a grading higher than the post to be filled; and
(ii)   in the event that the head of the component within which the vacant post is located, is graded lower than the vacant post, such a head may be a member of the selection committee.
(b)    A selection committee must, where reasonably possible, include adequate representation from designated groups.
(c)    Employees of a grading which is lower than the grading of the post to be filled may provide secretarial or advisory services during the selection process, but may not form part of the selection committee, except where the selection is done in terms of subregulation (a) (ii).
(d)    The selection committee must make a recommendation on the suitability of a candidate after considering only—
(i)   information based on valid methods, criteria or instruments for selection that are free from any bias or discrimination;
(ii)   the training, skills, competence and knowledge necessary to meet the inherent requirements of the job;
(iii)   the needs of the Service for developing human resources;
(iv)   the representativeness of the component where the post is located; and
(v)   the affirmative action programme of the Service.
(e)    A selection committee must record the reasons for its recommendation with reference to the criteria mentioned in subregulation (d).
(f)    When the National Commissioner does not approve a recommendation of a selection committee, he or she must record the reasons for his or her decision in writing.
(g)    Before making a decision on an appointment or promotion, the National Commissioner must—
(i)   satisfy himself that the candidate qualifies in all respects for the post and that his or her claims in his or her application for the post have been verified; and
(ii)   record that verification in writing.
(h)    The National Commissioner may promote an employee to a vacant post in the fixed establishment of the Service if—
(i)   such a vacancy is sufficiently funded; and
(ii)   the vacancy has been advertised and the candidate selected in accordance with regulations 43, 44 and subregulations (a) to (g).
(i)    A promotion may not come into effect before the first day of the month following the date on which the National Commissioner approved it.
(j)    No employee has any right to a promotion until the promotion has been approved in writing by the National Commissioner.
46.     Probationary period.  
(1)    No probationary period may apply to an appointment in a post in or additional to the fixed establishment of the Service for a period less than one year.
(2)    The National Commissioner may require an employee appointed to a new position in or additional to the fixed establishment of the Service for a period exceeding one year, to serve a probationary period of up to 24 months.
(3)    An employee who is seconded for a stated period to a department, any other organ of state, another government or any other body must, if on probation at the time of the secondment, serve the remainder of his or her probation at that department, other organ of state, another government or other body.
(4)    An employee who is transferred to another department, any other organ of state, another government or any other body must, if on probation at the time of the transfer, serve the remainder of his or her probation at that department, other organ of state, another government or other body.
(5)    A commander of a probationer must ensure that—
(a)   the probationer, at the commencement of the probationary period, knows the performance and other requirements for obtaining confirmation of probation;
(b)   the probationer, on a quarterly basis, receives written feedback on his or her performance and compliance with other requirements;
(c)   if necessary, the probationer receives training, counselling or other assistance to meet the requirements for confirmation;
(d)   the probationer receives written confirmation of appointment at the end of the probationary period, if he or she has been found suitable for the relevant post; and
(e)   when dismissal as a result of poor performance is considered, the probationer is afforded the opportunity to state his or her case, during which process the probationer may be assisted by a personal representative, including a colleague or a trade union representative.
47.     Resignation.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must determine the manner in which an employee must submit his or her resignation.
(2)    The National Commissioner must conduct an exit interview with an employee who has resigned and record the reasons given by the employee for his or her resignation.
(3)    An employee who has submitted his or her resignation to the National Commissioner, may not withdraw his or her resignation, unless the National Commissioner consents thereto in writing.
(4)    The National Commissioner may determine the period of written notice that must be given by an employee who resigns from the Service.
48.     Employee records.  

The National Commissioner must keep a record of each employee and of each post in the fixed establishment of the Service in accordance with the National Minimum Information Requirements issued by the Minister of Public Service and Administration.

Part 5   Performance Management  
49.     Systems for performance management and development.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must determine and implement a system for the performance management and development of employees in the Service.
(2)    The determination and implementation of a system for the performance of members of the SMS must be done with the concurrence of the Minister.
(3)    Before utilising a performance management and development system referred to in subregulation (1), the National Commissioner must—
(a)   pilot the system on groups of employees in all occupational categories sufficient to enable reasonable validity; and
(b)   consult with trade unions represented in the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council.
(4)    The period in respect of which performance is to be assessed (the “performance cycle”) may not exceed one year and, for the purposes of planning, pay progression, performance incentives and non-financial awards, must be linked to the period of a financial year.
(5)    For each employee other than an employee in the SMS, the National Commissioner must determine—
(a)   an annual date for written assessment of performance; and
(b)   a commander responsible for monitoring, supervising and assessing the performance of the employee.
(6)    The commander must—
(a)   as far as possible, meet on a regular basis with the employee to discuss the basic objectives of his or her component and the role of the employee in the success or failure in achieving those objectives;
(b)   before the performance cycle commences, or within four months after appointment to a post, explain the performance assessment procedure to the employee; and
(c)   inform the employee of the criteria used for his or her performance assessment.
(7)    The commander must monitor the performance of the employee on a continuous basis and give the employee feedback on his or her performance—
(a)   
(i)   verbally, if the performance of the employee is satisfactory; and
(ii)   in writing if the performance of the employee is unsatisfactory;
(b)   at least twice in the six months preceding the annual formal assessment date of the employee; and
(c)   in writing, on the annual performance assessment date, using the instrument referred to in regulation 51 (1) (b).
50.     Performance agreements.  
(1)    An employee must enter into a performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature within two months of his or her date of appointment and thereafter within four months of the beginning of each financial year.
(2)    If, during the performance cycle, an employee is appointed to a new position at the same salary level, a new performance agreement or agreement of a similar nature must be entered into for the new position and the performance assessment must take both periods of work in the cycle into consideration.
(3)    A performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature must include the following—
(a)   a persal number, job title and post grade as well as a clear description of the employee’s job, with emphasis on the main objectives, job purpose and the relevant outputs or key performance areas (generic assessment factors);
(b)   a workplan containing the outputs, activities and resource requirements; and
(c)   a personal development plan (PDP) that identifies the developmental needs of the employee in terms of the job requirements and how the needs will be addressed.
(4)    If both the employee and his or her commander cannot sign the performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature due to a dispute relating to the content of the agreement, the National Commissioner must appoint an employee within one month after the expiry of the period stipulated in subregulation (1), to consider the dispute.
(5)    The employee appointed in terms of subregulation (4) must within one month of his or her appointment consider the dispute and recommend to the National Commissioner a performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature to be signed.
(6)    The employee and his or her commander must sign the recommended performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature within two weeks of receipt thereof.
(7)    An employee will not be eligible for performance assessment or qualify for performance incentives and awards if he or she has not signed a performance agreement or an agreement of similar nature.
(8)    The performance agreement of the National Commissioner must be entered into with the Minister.
51.     Performance assessment.  
(1)    The National Commissioner—
(a)   may establish separate performance assessment measures for different occupational categories or levels of work; but
(b)   must designate a single assessment instrument to assist in deciding on performance incentives, non-financial awards, pay progression and the performance development of an employee.
(2)    While conducting formal performance assessments, a rating scale must be utilized that has a mid- point, indicating that the performance of the employee meets the requirements of the job and the standards agreed upon.
(3)    The National Commissioner must institute performance moderation measures to ensure reasonability and consistency in the application of the performance management system.
(4)    Assessment must be based only on the information contained in the designated performance assessment instrument, but where an appeal is lodged against an assessment, the information furnished in connection with the appeal, must also be considered.
(5)    The National Commissioner must ensure that performance assessments are finalised within six months after the end of a performance cycle.
(6)    The National Commissioner must ensure that accurate records of all performance assessments and the outcomes thereof are kept.
(7)    An employee acting in a higher position must be assessed at the level of his or her permanent position.
(8)    The incentive of an employee acting in a higher position must be calculated at the level of his or her permanent position, regardless of whether or not an acting allowance was paid.
(9)    The performance assessment of the National Commissioner must be done by the Minister.
52.     Outcome and communication of assessment results.  
(1)    The commander of the employee must in writing inform the employee of the outcome of the assessment and, if the assessment is unsatisfactory, of the reasons for that assessment.
(2)    An employee who is not satisfied with the outcome of his or her assessment, may refuse to sign it.
(3)    The commander of the employee must inform the employee of the appeal procedure to follow if the employee is not satisfied with the outcome of his or her assessment.
(4)    At any appeal against the outcome of his or her assessment, the employee may be assisted by a fellow employee or a representative of a trade union forming part of the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council.
(5)    The National Commissioner may communicate the performance assessment results of an employee to a person not employed in the Service only if the employee gives his or her written consent.
53.     Managing unsatisfactory performance.  

In the case of unsatisfactory performance, the commander must—

(a)   provide systematic remedial or developmental support to assist the employee to improve his or her performance; or
(b)   if the performance is so unsatisfactory as to be poor and the desired improvement cannot be effected, consider to initiate the process to have the employee discharged on account of his or her unfitness or incapacity to carry out his or her duties.
54.     Performance incentive and award scheme.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must establish a performance incentive and award scheme for employees or any category of employees of the Service and from time to time determine a percentage of the remuneration budget of the Service that may not be exceeded for the purpose of granting performance incentives.
(2)    To establish a performance incentive and award scheme for employees, the National Commissioner must—
(a)   in writing determine the nature, rules and control measures of the scheme;
(b)   communicate the nature and rules of the scheme to all employees;
(c)   ensure that employees who implement the quality and quantity control measures of the scheme, are not entrusted with the implementation of that scheme in relation to themselves; and
(d)   include provisions for the introduction of non-financial incentives if deemed appropriate.
55.     Suggestions, improvements and innovations.  
(1)    If an employee makes a suggestion, improvement or innovation of exceptional value to the Service or the public service as a whole, the State shall have the right to make use of any such suggestion, improvement or innovation without the employee being entitled to any compensation for such suggestion, improvement or innovation.
(2)    If an employee makes a suggestion, improvement or innovation of exceptional value to the Service or the public service as a whole or has exceptional ability, a special qualification or has rendered meritorious service to the Service or the public service as a whole the National Commissioner may, reward the employee through—
(a)   a non-monetary reward;
(b)   a non-pensionable cash award to be determined by the National Commissioner; or
(c)   such a non-monetary reward and a cash award.
Part 6   Training  
58.     Institutional arrangements regarding training, education and development.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must oversee and ensure the participation of the Service in any institution aimed at promoting training in the public service.
(2)    The National Commissioner must, where appropriate, ensure that any institution responsible for training in the Service gains accreditation from the South African Qualifications Authority in accordance with the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No. 58 of 1995).
(3)    The National Commissioner must ensure that funds are available for the training and development of employees.
(4)    A commander must provide training and development opportunities for employees under his or her command in accordance with the training plan of the Service.
(5)    A member of the SMS must avail himself or herself to train employees in the Service or to present training.
(6)    A training institution offering any training directed by the National Commissioner must issue certificates upon the successful completion thereof.
57.     Occupational specific competencies and training.  

The National Commissioner must determine the required competencies and training for various occupational categories or specific employees in the Service.

58.     Training assistance.  
(1)    If it will contribute to the performance of the work of the Service, the National Commissioner may grant any financial or other assistance for any study, training or research where—
(a)   he or she has requested an employee to undertake such study, training or research; or
(b)   the employee has requested such assistance.
(2)    The National Commissioner may grant any financial or other assistance for part-time or full-time activities at either local or international institutions. He or she may also grant assistance for studies and training through training interventions, such as short courses, congresses, symposia, seminars, conferences, workshops, lectures and study tours.
(3)    The National Commissioner may—
(a)   grant bursaries for higher education and training to both serving and prospective employees, but may allocate bursaries for general education and further education and training only to serving employees; and
(b)   not require contractual service in recompense for assistance received where an employee receives assistance for general education or further education and training.
(4)    The National Commissioner may defray any expenses associated with study, research or training, but need not cover the full expenses.
(5)    A serving employee must retain his or her salary, which shall count as part of the financial assistance from the Service, during any study, research or training.
(6)    Subject to the Treasury Regulations, the National Commissioner may waive the whole or any part of study debts.
(7)    Where the National Commissioner provides a bursary for higher education to an employee or prospective employee—
(a)   the bursary holder must enter into a contract with the Service in terms of which he or she—
(i)   in the case of a bursary holder who undertakes full-time study, will redeem the bursary by serving the Service on the basis of one year for each year of study, or any part thereof; or
(ii)   in the case of a bursary holder who undertakes part-time study will redeem the bursary by serving the Service for at least one year after attaining the relevant qualification; and
(b)   a bursary holder who undertakes full-time study, must commence serving the Service after he or she has met all the requirements for the attainment of the relevant qualification.
(8)    An employee who fails to complete the relevant qualification must redeem any obligation in terms of the contract either through service or repayment of the bursary amount plus interest at a rate determined by the Minister of Finance in terms of section 80 (1) (b) of the Public Finance Management Act.
(9)    In the case of an employee who studies or undergoes training for short periods, the National Commissioner may, as a precondition for providing assistance, require the employee to enter into a contract with the Service in terms of which he or she will serve the Service for a commensurable period.
(10)    For the purpose of this regulation -”further education and training” means further education and training as defined in section 1 of the Further Education and Training Act, 2006 (Act No. 16 of 2006); “general education” means the compulsory school attendance phase as referred to in section 3 of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996); and “higher education” means higher education as defined in section 1 of the Higher Education Act, 1997 (Act No. 101 of 1997).
Part 7   Labour Matters  
59.     Mandating and management of negotiations.  
(1)    The Minister may enter into an agreement on a matter of mutual interest only if he or she—
(a)   is responsible for managing collective bargaining on behalf of the State as employer in that forum;
(b)   has authority to deal with the matter concerned; and
(c)   meets the fiscal requirements contained in regulation 60.
(2)    Collective bargaining shall be regulated by the Labour Relations Act.
(3)    On matters specific to the Service, the Minister must manage bargaining in the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council.
(4)    The Minister must provide the Minister of Public Service and Administration with a copy of any collective agreement concluded in the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council.
60.     Matters with fiscal implications.  

Subject to regulation 59, the Minister may enter into a collective agreement in the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council on any matter that has financial implications only if—

(a)   he or she has a realistic calculation of the costs involved in both the current and the subsequent fiscal year;
(b)   the agreement does not conflict with the National Treasury Regulations; and
(c)   he or she can cover the cost—
(i)   from his or her departmental budget;
(ii)   on the basis of a written commitment from the Treasury to provide additional funds; or
(iii)   from the budgets of other departments or agencies with their written agreement and Treasury approval.
CHAPTER 5   SENIOR MANAGEMENT SERVICE (SMS)  
61.     Establishment of SMS.  
(1)    The National Commissioner must, with the concurrence of the Minister, create an appropriate number of posts at senior management level.
(2)    The persons occupying SMS posts must be managed as a public service-wide pool of scarce resources to be utilised in the best interest of the Service.
(3)    The conditions of service of the persons occupying SMS posts must accord with their positions as high-level managers or specialists, while employment practices must be fair and take into account the need to redress the imbalances of the past.
62.     Composition of SMS and grading of posts.  
(1)    The number of members of the SMS and their functions must be determined by the National Commissioner through the processes of planning and work organisation.
(2)    The grading of SMS posts must be determined through the job evaluation system determined by the National Commissioner.
63.     Flexible employment practices within a framework of uniform norms and standards.  
(1)    Subject to regulation 45, the National Commissioner must appoint members of the SMS.
(2)    The National Commissioner must utilize members of the SMS within a framework of uniform norms and standards.
(3)    The Act, these Regulations and the directives issued and determinations made by the Minister, constitute the framework of uniform norms and standards applicable to members of the SMS.
(4)    These Regulations apply to members of the SMS, unless otherwise indicated. If any conflict arises between a provision of this Chapter and a provision of any other Chapter of these Regulations, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
64.     Handbook for SMS.  

The Minister may include any or all of the determinations, directives, guidelines and provisions applicable to the SMS in a Handbook for the SMS.

65.     Advertising of posts and employment equity.  

The National Commissioner may issue directives on how SMS posts are to be advertised and the application forms to be utilised and targets to be achieved in promoting a SMS that is broadly representative of the South African people, including representation according to race, gender and disability.

66.     Competency-based selection.  

The National Commissioner may issue directives on the desired managerial and leadership competencies of members of the SMS and the selection processes for the filling of SMS posts.

67.     Nurturing of talent to sustain SMS.  

The National Commissioner may introduce programmes to identify and nurture talented individuals for possible appointment to SMS posts.

68.     Employment contracts.  
(1)    A person newly appointed to the SMS, other than the National Commissioner, must, within two months of his or her date of appointment conclude a contract of employment, which must be based on the provisions of the contracts set out in Annexure 2 or 3.
(2)    The National Commissioner, must, within two months after his or her date of appointment, conclude a contract of employment, which must be based on the provisions of the contract set out in Annexure 1.
69.     Performance management and development.  
(1)    Any person appointed to a post in the SMS must enter into a performance agreement within two months of his or her date of appointment and thereafter by the 31 May of each financial year.
(2)    The National Commissioner must, within two months after his or her date of appointment and the beginning of each financial year, enter into a performance agreement with the Minister.
(3)    Such performance agreement must—
(a)   assist the member of the SMS to define his or her key responsibilities and priorities;
(b)   encourage improved communication between that member and the person he or she reports to; and
(c)   enable the person that member reports to, to assess his or her work and provide appropriate support.
70.     Determination of conditions of service.  
(1)    The Minister must annually make determinations regarding the conditions of service of members of the SMS.
(2)    Any determination made by the Minister in regard to the conditions of service of members of the SMS, must take into account the advice of the panel established in terms of regulation 71.
71.     Panel for review of conditions of service of members of SMS.  
(1)    Establishment of Panel—
(a)   The Minister must once every three years appoint a panel to inquire into conditions of service of members of the SMS and to advise him or her accordingly.
(b)   The Minister must announce the names of the members of the panel, their terms of reference and terms of office by a notice in the Gazette.
(2)    Constitution of Panel—
(a)   The panel must consist of such number of persons as determined by the Minister.
(b)   Persons must be appointed to the panel on the basis of their knowledge of, or a vested interest in, matters relating to the functions of the panel.
(c)   A member of the panel must serve in a part-time capacity.
(d)   The Minister must designate one member as chairperson and another as deputy chairperson of the panel.
(e)   If the chairperson is absent or for any reason is unable to act as chairperson, the deputy chairperson must act as the chairperson of the panel.
(3)    Remuneration of members—

Members of the panel who are appointed on the basis of their knowledge of matters relating to the functions of the panel must be remunerated on the basis of and according to the scales approved by the National Treasury.

(4)    Meetings of Panel—
(a)   The panel must meet at a time and place determined by the chairperson of the panel.
(b)   The decision of a majority of members of the panel present at a meeting of the panel, constitutes a decision of the panel, and, in the event of an equality of votes on any matter, the person presiding at the meeting concerned has a casting vote in addition to that person’s deliberative vote.
(5)    Administration of Panel—

The National Commissioner must designate such employees of the Service as may be necessary to perform the work incidental to the functions of the panel.

72.     Deployment of members of SMS.  
(1)    The Minister may, on his or her own initiative, facilitate—
(a)   the transfer of a member of the SMS from one post or position to another post or position;
(b)   the transfer of a member of the SMS from one department to another department in accordance with section 14 of the Public Service Act; or
(c)   the secondment of a member of the SMS in accordance with section 39 of the Act.
(2)    A vacant post in the SMS that is to be filled through a transfer as contemplated in subparagraphs (1) (a) or (b), need not be advertised in terms of regulation 65.
(3)    The personal circumstances of a member of the SMS must be taken into account before she or he is transferred or seconded in terms of paragraph (1).
73.     Training and development principles.  

The National Commissioner must oversee the development of programmes to equip members of the SMS for their responsibilities. The programmes to be developed must be based on the competencies required of members of the SMS in terms of both their current and future responsibilities.

74.     Standard training programmes.  

The National Commissioner must—

(a)   identify the generic managerial and leadership training needs of members of the SMS;
(b)   arrange that standard courses and programmes be developed on the basis of those training needs; and
(c)   continuously evaluate those courses and programmes with due regard to their relevance and value for money.
75.     Ethics and conduct.  
(1)    Members of the SMS must—
(a)   display the highest possible standards of ethical conduct;
(b)   set an example to their subordinates and maintain high levels of professionalism and integrity in their interaction with political office-bearers and the public;
(c)   ensure that they minimise conflicts of interest and that they put the public interest first in the performance of their functions; and
(d)   avoid any conflict of interest that may arise in representing the interests of the Service and being a member of a trade union, as defined in section 213 of the Labour Relations Act.
(2)    The Minister may, after consultation with the Public Service Commission, make determinations to promote ethical conduct amongst members of the SMS and to supplement the South African Police Service Code of Conduct Regulations and the Financial Disclosure Framework contained in Chapter 2.
(3)    The Minister may provide such guidance and assistance to members of the SMS as he or she may deem necessary to minimize conflicts of interest and to promote professional conduct.
76.     Employer-employee relations.  

Employer-employee relations for the SMS must aim to protect the rights and interests of its members in a manner appropriate to their positions as high-level employees.

77.     Misconduct and incapacity.  

The Minister may, subject to the Labour Relations Act, issue directives to establish misconduct and incapacity procedures for members of the SMS.

78.     Exit management.  
(1)    The termination of service of members of the SMS must be done in a manner that is fair to the individuals concerned and takes into account the public interests.
(2)    The Minister may issue directives and provide guidelines on the procedures to be followed and benefits to be paid when terminating the services of members of the SMS.
CHAPTER 6   REPEAL, SAVING AND TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  
79.     Repeal of regulations and saving.  
(1)    The South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 2008 (published in Government Notice No. R.973 on 12 September 2008), are hereby repealed.
(2)    Anything done under the South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 2008, which could be done under a provision of these Regulations, shall be deemed to have been done under that provision.
(3)    Any process, provided for in the South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 2008 (published by Government Notice No. R.973 on 12 September 2008), that was initiated prior to the coming into operation of these Regulations but was not yet completed at the time of the coming into operation of these Regulations, may be proceeded with and be finalized in terms of the South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 1999 as if these Regulations had not come into operation.
80.     Transitional arrangements.  

All vacancies advertised before the coming into operation of these Regulations in respect of posts to be filled on or after that date, shall be filled in accordance with the provisions, prescripts and requirements applicable and in force immediately before that date.

81.     Short title and commencement.  

These Regulations shall be called the South African Police Service Employment Regulations, 2017, and shall come into operation on the date of publication thereof in the Gazette.

ANNEXURE 1   EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT FOR THE NATIONAL COMMISSIONER  
ANNEXURE 2   PERMANENT EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT FOR MEMBERS OF THE SENIOR MANAGEMENT SERVICE  
ANNEXURE 3   EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT FOR A FIXED TERM OR A SPECIFIC PROJECT FOR MEMBERS OF THE SENIOR MANAGEMENT SERVICE  

____________



Footnotes
Repealed Act	Act 58 of 1995 has been repealed by s 37 of Act 67 of 2008


End of Document