



(ZA) WHISTLE BLOWING BY-LAW
NW By-laws of Former Entities
[LOCAL AUTHORITY NOTICE NO. 261 OF 2014.]
[DATE OF COMMENCEMENT: 9 DECEMBER 2014.]


NW By-laws of Former Entities   >  NW By-laws of Former Entities   >  Whistle Blowing By-laws

This By-law was published in Provincial Gazette No. 7380 dated 9 December, 2014.
TLOKWE LOCAL MUNICIPALITY
WHISTLE BLOWING BY-LAW
Notice is hereby given in terms of section 13 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No. 32 of 2000) that the Tlokwe City Council adopted the following Whistle Blowing By-law which will come into effect from date of publication hereof in the Provincial Gazette.
INDEX
1. Introduction
2. Objectives of the By-law
3. Scope of the By-law
4. The By-law
5. Reporting of concerns
6. How the complaint will be dealt with
7. Creating awareness

WHISTLE BLOWING BY-LAW
1.     Introduction  
1.1   The Tlokwe City Council is committed to the highest standards of openness, integrity and accountability. We aim to promote a culture in which employees feel able to raise genuine and valid concerns without fear of victimization, discrimination or disadvantage. Members of the public and service providers are also encouraged to raise concerns about our activities so that we can investigate and take appropriate action. The Tlokwe City Council therefore recognizes the fact that—
1.1.1   criminal and other irregular conduct within the Tlokwe City Council is detrimental to good, effective, accountable and transparent governance;
1.1.2   there is a need for procedures in terms of which employees should, without fear of reprisals, disclose information relating to suspected or alleged criminal or other irregular conduct;
1.1.3   every employee has a responsibility to disclose criminal and any other irregular conduct in the workplace; and
1.1.4   employees who disclose such information must be protected from any reprisals as a result of such disclosure.
2.     Objectives of the By-law  
2.1   The Protected Disclosures Act came into effect on 16 February 2001. In order to remain in compliance with the Act, and its duty as a public body in terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa to promote good governance, the Tlokwe City Council will—
2.1.1   strive to create a culture which will facilitate the disclosure of information by employees relating to criminal and other irregular conduct in the workplace in a responsible manner by providing clear guidelines for the disclosure of such information and protection against reprisals as a result of such disclosure; and
2.1.2   promote the eradication of criminal and other irregular conduct within the Tlokwe City Council.
2.2   The Policy is intended to encourage and enable staff to raise concerns rather than overlooking a problem or blowing the whistle to inappropriate channels.
2.3   Furthermore the policy aims to—
2.3.1   provide avenues for staff to raise concerns;
2.3.2   inform staff on how to take the matter further if they are dissatisfied with the response; and
2.3.3   reassure staff that they will be protected from reprisals or victimization for whistle blowing in good faith.
3.     Scope of the By-law  
3.1   There are existing grievance procedures in place to enable employees to raise grievances relating to their employment. This By-law is intended to cover concerns that fall outside the scope of grievance procedures. These concerns indicated in the Act, are the following—
3.1.1   That a criminal offence has been committed is being committed or is likely to be committed;
3.1.2   That a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which that person is subject;
3.1.3   That a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur;
3.1.4   That the health or safety of an individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered;
3.1.5   That the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged;
3.1.6   Unfair discrimination as contemplated in the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act No. 4 of 2000). or
3.2   That any matter referred to in paragraphs 3.1.1 to 3.1.6 has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed.
4.     The By-law  
4.1   Protected Disclosures Act: section 2 of the Protected Disclosures Act clearly defines the “Objects of the Act” as follows—
4.1.1   To protect an employee from being subjected to an occupational detriment on account of having made a protected disclosure;
4.1.2   Occupational detriment includes being subjected to any disciplinary action, being dismissed, suspended, demoted, harassed, intimidated, transferred against one’s will, refused transfer or promotion, having a term or condition of one’s employment or retirement altered to one’s disadvantage, being refused a reference, or being provided with an adverse reference from the Tlokwe City Council, being denied appointment to any employment, profession or office, being threatened with any of the above or being otherwise adversely affected in one’s employment with the Tlokwe City Council, including employment opportunities and work security;
4.1.3   To provide for remedies in connection with any occupational detriment suffered on account of having made a protected disclosure;
4.1.4   To provide for procedures in terms of which an employee can, in a responsible manner, disclose information regarding improprieties by his or her colleagues, other stakeholders and employer.
4.2   This By-law is developed based on the principle objects of the Protected Disclosures Act, which encourages and places a duty on employees to disclose any acts of misconduct without fear of any recriminations or reprisals.
4.3   Harassment or Victimization

The Tlokwe City Council will not tolerate harassment or victimization and will take action to protect employees when they raise a concern in good faith. Any act of harassment or victimization should be reported to the Municipal Manager. “Harassment or victimization” includes any acts falling under the definition of “occupational detriment”, referred to above. This does not mean that if an employee is already the subject of disciplinary or other action, that action will be halted as a result of their whistle blowing.
4.4   Confidentiality
4.4.1   The Tlokwe City Council will do its best to protect an individual’s identity when he/she raises a concern and does not want their identity to be disclosed. It must be appreciated, however, that the investigation process may reveal the source of the information and a statement by the employee may be required as part of the evidence. It is, furthermore, a possibility that the employee may be required in due course to provide evidence at a hearing or trial.
4.4.2   The Tlokwe City Council encourages employees to put their names to allegations. Concerns expressed anonymously are difficult to investigate; nevertheless they will be followed up at the discretion of the Tlokwe City Council. This discretion will be applied by taking into account the following—

(a) Seriousness of the issue raised;

(b) credibility of the concern;

(c) likelihood of confirming the allegation; and

(d) sufficiency of information provided.
4.4.3   Employees who do utilize the hotline also need to be aware of the fact that it will not be possible for the employee to be advised of the steps taken by the Tlokwe City arising from the allegation.
4.5   False Allegations - *ALLEGATIONS NOT MADE IN GOOD FAITH
4.5.1   Employees or other parties must understand that they need to make the allegations in good faith.

“Good faith” means that the employee must believe that the allegations are true.

This does not mean that the employee has to prove that the allegations are correct. It simply requires that the employee believes them to be correct and that this is likely given the circumstances surrounding the allegations.

Accordingly, employees must guard against reporting rumours or “hunches” or suspicions that they “smell a rat” without information backing such rumours or hunches.

Most importantly, employees must guard against deliberately making allegations which the employee knows or suspects to be false and/or which are made with malicious intent. Such allegations prevent the employee from benefiting from the protection of the Public Disclosures Act.
5.     Reporting of concerns  
5.1   For minor issues, employees should normally raise the concerns with their immediate supervisor/manager. In general, however, the whistle blowing procedure is expected to be used for potentially more serious and sensitive issues (e.g. fraud and corruption).
5.2   The first step will be for the employee to approach his/her immediate supervisor/manager unless he/she or senior management is the subject of the complaint, in which case the Municipal Manager should be informed. Should the complaint be found by the line manager to be substantiated, he/she will consult with the Municipal Manager on whether the matter should be investigated internally or referred to the appropriate external body (e.g. the SAPS).
5.3   Concerns are better raised in writing. The background and history of the concern, giving names, dates and places where possible should be set out and the reason why the individual is particularly concerned about the situation. Those who are uncomfortable to put their concern in writing can telephone the Tlokwe City Council Fraud Hotline number.

The earlier the concern is reported, the easier it is to take action and initiate recovery procedures where necessary.
5.4   Employees are not expected to prove the truth of an allegation; however, they will need to demonstrate to the person contacted that there are sufficient grounds for concern.
5.5   Advice and guidance on how matters of concern may be pursued can be obtained from the Municipal Manager.
6.     How the complaint will be dealt with  
6.1   The action taken by the Tlokwe City Council will depend on the nature of the concern.

The possible actions may, among others be to—
6.1.1   investigate by line management;
6.1.2   investigate by forensic services; and/or
6.1.3   outsource/co-source investigation to a consultant forensic firm under the authority of forensic services; and/or
6.1.4   refer to the SAPS or other relevant law enforcement agency.
6.2   In order to protect individuals and the Tlokwe City Council, initial enquiries will be made to decide whether an investigation is appropriate and, if so, what form it should take.
6.3   Some concerns may be resolved without the need for investigation.
6.4   The amount of contact between the body investigating the issues and the persons raising the concern will depend on the nature of the matters raised. The potential difficulties involved and the clarity of the information provided. If necessary, further information will be sought from the individual.
6.5   The Tlokwe City Council accepts that employees need to be assured that the matter has been properly addressed. However, the progression of investigations will be handled in a confidential manner and will not be disclosed or discussed with any persons other than those who have a legitimate right to such information.
7.     Creating Awareness  
7.1   In order for the By-law to be sustainable, it must be supported by a structured education, communication and awareness programme.
7.2   It is the responsibility of all directors and managers to ensure that all employees are made aware of, and receive appropriate training and education with regard to the Whistle Blowing By-law.
7.3   Provision for rewards for providing information is available under the Executive Mayor’s votes.

Tlokwe City Council Anti-Fraud Fax line - (018) 299 5227. 

Tlokwe City Council Anti-Fraud Telephone line - 080 020 5127.

DR NE BLAAI MOKGETHI

MUNICIPAL MANAGER

____________


End of Document
(ZA) WHISTLE BLOWING BY-LAW
Page 5 of 5


