



(ZA) GN 950 of 1 April 2022:  Regulations regarding the funding of political parties issued in terms of section 24 (2) of the Act ()
South Africa National Subordinate Legislation


National Subordinate Legislation  >  ZA Subordinate Legislation  >  P  >  Political Party Funding Act No. 6 of 2018  >  Rules and Regulations  >  Regulations

ELECTORAL COMMISSION   By virtue of the power vested in it in terms of section 24 (2) of the Act, the Electoral Commission hereby issues the regulations as set out in the Schedule below.
1.     Definitions.  

In these regulations a word or phrase to which a meaning has been assigned in the Act has that meaning, and, unless the context indicates otherwise—

“contributor”    means any private source who makes a donation as contemplated in section 3 (3) (a) of the Act;
“disclosure threshold”    means the threshold referred to in section 9 (1) (a) of the Act;
“Presidential Regulations”    means the regulations annexed to the Act as Schedule 2 or subsequently proclaimed in terms of section 24 (1) of the Act;
“POCA”    is the Prevention of Organised Crime Act 121 of 1998;
“proceeds of unlawful activities”    bears the meaning assigned in section 1 (1) of POCA;
“unlawful activity”    bears the meaning assigned in section 1 (1) of POCA.
2.     Request not to disclose contribution in terms of section 3 (5) of the Act.  
(1)    A contributor who requests the Commission in terms of section 3 (5) of the Act not to disclose the contributor’s identity must do so in a form substantially similar to Form PPR 1.
(2)    The Commission must determine the request taking into account the following—
(a)   The reason for the request and the need for anonymity;
(b)   the amount to be contributed;
(c)   the source of the monies to be contributed;
(d)   whether there is reason to believe that the contributor has contravened the Act;
(f)   the public interest in disclosing the information in question and whether it outweighs the consideration in (a); and
(g)   any other factor that the Commission considers relevant taking into account the purpose of the Act.

(Editorial Note: Numbering as per original Government Gazette.)

(3)    The Commission must decide the request before the contributor makes the contribution. Should the request for non-disclosure be refused by the Commission, the contributor can then either elect not to make the contribution, or to make the contribution knowing it will not be confidential.
(4)    If the Commission determines not to grant the request, it must inform the contributor of its reasons in the prescribed form substantially similar to Form PPR2.
3.     Proceeds from Unlawful Activity.  
(1)    Should the Commission establish or have reasonable grounds to suspect that the source of the money relating to a contribution derives from the proceeds of any unlawful activity, the Commission shall refuse the contribution.
4.     Determination of a fee to defray costs of administering and managing the Multi-Party Democracy Fund.  
(1)    Subject to the limit referred to in section 3 (6) of the Act, the Commission must on an annual basis determine a fee it will charge to defray the cost of administering and managing the Multi-Party Democracy Fund.
(2)    Within two weeks of the start of every financial year, the Commission must publish in the Gazette the fee that it will charge to defray the cost of administering and managing the Multi-Party Democracy Fund for that financial year.
(3)    The fees published in terms of sub-regulation (2) must be deducted from the monies held in credit in the Multi-Party Democracy Fund at the end of each three-month period of the financial year, but before any balance standing to the credit in the Multi-Party Democracy Fund is carried forward as contemplated in section 4 (3) of the Act.
5.     Payment of money to represented political party.  
(1)    The Commission must make the payment contemplated in section 6 (7) of the Act to a represented political party—
(a)   All allocations to which a represented political party is entitled as determined in terms of regulations 3 and 4 of Schedule 2 of the Presidential Regulations, must be paid to the represented political party in question in four equal instalments, each within three months of the previous payment. The first instalment must be paid within four weeks of the beginning of the financial year in question.
(b)   only if the political party has provided the Commission with the particulars of its bank account opened in terms of section 12 (1) (b) of the Act and the additional information required in a form substantially similar to Form PPR3A; and
(c)   if the political party has been allocated money from the Funds in the previous year, only if the political party has submitted to the Commission the statement contemplated in section 12 (2) (d) (i) and the auditor’s opinion in terms of section 12 (3) (e).
(2)    If the particulars provided in terms of sub-regulation (1) (b) change, the represented political party must notify the Commission in a form substantially similar to Form PPR3B within two weeks of that change.
(3)    Subject to regulation 5 (3) of the Presidential Regulations, all allocations from the Multi-Party Democracy Funds must be paid to the represented political party in question in terms of regulations 3 and 4 of Schedule 2 of the Presidential Regulations. The payments made must be based on the money accumulated in the Multi-Party Democracy Fund from contributions received in the preceding three months.
6.     Funding of Represented Political Parties by Legislatures.  
(1)    The accounting officer of a legislature must annually, within three (3) calendar months of the end of the financial year, disclose any funding of represented political parties under s 57 (2) and s 116 (2) of the Constitution respectively to the Commission using a form substantially similar to Form PPR7.
7.     Disclosure of donations received by Political Parties in terms of Section 9 of the Act.  
(1)    The accounting officer of a political party that receives donations from a single donor which together exceed the disclosure threshold must report to the Commission in a form substantially similar to Form PPR4 on a quarterly basis.
(2)    The Commission must keep a record of the disclosures made in terms of this regulation and make them publicly available in accordance with Regulation 9.
(3)    Political parties must submit disclosures within one (1) calendar month after the end of each quarter.
(4)    The Commission must publish the disclosures received in terms of 7 (3) within one (1) calendar month of the closing date stipulated in Regulation 7 (3).
8.     Disclosure of donations made by juristic persons and entities.  
(1)    A juristic person or entity that makes a donation to a political party, or aggregated donations which together exceed the disclosure threshold, must make the disclosure required in terms of section 9 (2) in a form substantially similar to Form PPR5 within one calendar month after the end of the quarter within which the donation that exceeds the disclosure threshold or the aggregate of donations exceeding the threshold was made.
(2)    The Commission must keep a record of the disclosures made in terms of this regulation and make them publicly available in accordance with Regulation 9.
9.     Publication of donations in terms of section 9 (3).  
(1)    The Commission must publish the disclosures made in terms of Regulations 7 and 8 quarterly and online.
10.     Duties of accounting officer of political party.  
(1)    The accounting officer of a represented political party, duly appointed in terms of section 12 (1) (c) of the Act, must keep separate books and records of account, in accordance with generally recognised accounting practice (GRAP), in respect of money allocated from the Funds and all transactions involving that money.
(2)    The accounting officer of a political party must—
(a)   submit the details of the political party’s office bearers, its official addresses and the auditors appointed in section 12 (1) (d) in forms substantially similar to PPR8, PPR9, PPR10 and PPR11. In the event of a change in respect of any details, the onus rests on the accounting officer to inform the Electoral Commission within a period of one (1) calendar month of a change thereof;
(b)   prepare the statements contemplated in section 12 (2) (d) (i) and (ii) and submit them to the appointed auditor within three months of end of the financial year;
(c)   in the preparation of the statements specifically account for the following—
(i)   any donations not accepted by the political party under section 8 (1), (2) and (3);
(ii)   any donations received from foreign entities for the purposes permitted in terms of section 8 (4) and what those donations were used for;
(iii)   all donations received in aggregate or otherwise that exceed the disclosure threshold;
(iv)   any income received by the political party other than that provided for in the Act;
(v)   any loans made to the political party and the terms on which the money was lent; and
(vi)   a list of the bank accounts in which all donations, the membership fees, and levies imposed by the political party are deposited into a bank account opened in the name of the political party or that receive donations on behalf of the party or for use by the party in the form substantially similar to Form PPR3A;
(d)   submit the auditor’s opinion and audited financial statements to the Commission within six months of the end of the financial year in a form substantially similar to Form PPR12.
11.     Issuing of direction by the Electoral Commission.  
(1)    A direction contemplated in section 15 of the Act must be in forms substantially similar to PPR13A and PPR13B.
(2)    The Commission may make regulations regarding any matter—
(a)   That may be prescribed in terms of this Act; or
(b)   That it considers necessary or expedient in order to achieve the objects of this Act, including method of submission of disclosures and declaration.
12.     Commencement date.  

These regulations shall come into operation on 1 April 2022.

Schedule 1  
Schedule of Offences  
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE FINES THAT MAY BE IMPOSED FOR GIVING FALSE INFORMATION, DECLARATIONS OR FALSE DECLARATIONS.   Offences under the Regulations issued in terms of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018, as contemplated in Section 18 (1) of the Act, in terms of which the Commission may institute proceedings to request the imposition of administrative fines in respect of any contravention of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018.
Schedule 2  
LODGEMENT OF A SECTION 14 (4) COMPLAINT RELATING TO THE INCOME OR EXPENDITURE OF A POLITICAL PARTY IN TERMS OF THE ACT   Any interested party may lodge with the Commission a complaint concerning any aspect relating to the income or expenditure of a political party in terms of Section 14 (4) of the Act.

A complaint must be lodged electronically or in hard copy at the Commission’s National Office. The complaint must contain the following information:

(a) Reference to the specific legislative provision transgressed;

(b) Full name and physical address of the complainant;

(c) Email address and telephone number where the complainant can be contacted. These contact details must at all times be in a working condition;

(d) The interest of the complainant in the matter;

(e) Details of the complaint;

(f) Proof supporting the complaint;

(g) Reasons for the complaint and remedy sought; and

(h) Name and contact details of the party against whom complaint is lodged.

In considering and deciding on the complaint received, the Commission may take any one or more of the following actions:

(a) Investigate the factual basis of the complaint or cause it to be investigated based on the information provided by the complainant;

(b) Afford other interested parties an opportunity to make written or oral submissions;

(c) Call for written or oral submissions from other persons or parties;

(d) Call upon the complainant to submit further information or arguments in writing or verbally; or

(e) Conduct a hearing on the objection.

In a case where the complainant wishes to remain anonymous, or in the case of whistle-blowing, the Commission will, at its discretion, decide on the adequacy and reliability of the information provided by the complainant. All electronic complaints must be submitted to the following email address: ComplaintsPPF@elections.org.za.

All hardcopy complaints must be delivered or couriered to the following physical address, and must be clearly marked for attention “PPF COMPLAINTS”.

Riverside Office Park  
Elections House  
1303 Heuwel Avenue  
Centurion  
0157  
Schedule 3  
Part A – Table of Prescribed Forms  

The Forms prescribed for the purposes of these regulations are set out in this Schedule.

1. Whenever a document is required—

(1) in terms of a section of the Act or a provision of these regulations as listed in column 1 of this Schedule; and

(2) for a purpose listed in column 2 of this Schedule the document must be substantially in the form of the annexure listed opposite that section number in column 3, and must be produced, delivered, or filed, as the case may be, subject to any conditions or requirements listed opposite that section number in column 4.

Part B – Templates of Forms  
Electoral Commission  
PPR1 – Request for Non-Disclosure   (in terms of Section 3 (5) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 2 (1))
Non-disclosure request by Contributor  
Electoral Commission  
PPR2 – Response to Request for Non-Disclosure   (in terms of Section 3 (5) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 2 (4))
Notice in response to a request for non-disclosure  
Electoral Commission  
PPR3A – Notice of Political Parties Bank Account Details   (in terms of Section 12 (1) (b) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 5 (1) (b))
Notice of banking details of political party1   (To be completed by the Appointed Accounting Officer)
Electoral Commission  
PPR3B – Change of Bank Account Details   (in terms of Section 12 (1) (b) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 5 (2))
Notice of change of banking details of political party2   (To be completed by the Appointed Accounting Officer)
Electoral Commission  
PPR4 – Disclosure of Donations Received by Political Party   (in terms of Section 9 (1) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 7)
Donation disclosure by a political party3  
Electoral Commission  
PPR5 – Disclosure of Donations Made by Juristic Person   (in terms of Section 9 (2) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 8 (1))
Donation disclosure by a juristic person4  
Electoral Commission  
PPR6 – List of all Donations received and made as contemplated in Section 9 (1) and 9 (2) of the Act in the Gazette   (in terms of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 8 (2))
List of donations received in terms of section 9 (1) and 9 (2)   In accordance with Section 9 (3) of the Political Party Funding Act, Act 6 of 2018, the Electoral Commission hereby publishes the undermentioned list of all donation made during the period ............................................... to ...................................................
Electoral Commission  
PPR7 – Disclosure by Accounting Officers of Legislatures in accordance with section 23 (2) of the Act.  
Accounting officer’s record of funding to Represented political parties  
Electoral Commission  
PPR8 – Register of Office Bearers of Political Parties   (in terms of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 10 (2) (a))
Notice of office bearers5  
A. President/ Leader  
B. Deputy President/Leader  
C. National Chairperson  
D. Secretary General  
E. Treasurer General  
F. Other (Specify position in the space provided below)  
Electoral Commission  
PPR9 – Notice by a Political Party of Official Addresses   (in terms of Section 12 of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 10 (2))
Notice of official addresses6  
Electoral Commission  
PPR 10 – Notice by a Political Party of the Name of the Appointed Accounting Officer   (in terms of Section 12 (1) (c) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 10 (1))
Notice of appointment of accounting officer  
Electoral Commission  
PPR11 – Notice by a Political Party of the Name of the Appointed Auditor   (in terms of Section 12 (1) (d) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 10 (2) (a))
Notice of appointment of auditor7  
Electoral Commission  
PPR12 – Auditor’s Opinion   (in terms of Section 12 (4) of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018 as read with Regulation 10 (2) (d))
Electoral Commission  
Annexure “A” To PPR12  
Donations received which exceeds the disclosure threshold as contemplated in section 9 (1), as read together with the Regulation 7  
Electoral Commission  
Annexure “B” To PPR12  
All income received by the political party which falls outside the ambit of section 12 (3) (d) of the Act.  
Electoral Commission  
Annexure “C” To PPR12  
List of loans received by political party with specification of agreed commercial terms in terms of section 12 (3) (f) of the Act.  
Electoral Commission  
Annexure “D” To PPR12  
All transactions and/or allocated monies spent by the represented political party in contravention of section 7 of the Act.  
Electoral Commission  
PPR13A – Directive issued by the Commission   (in terms of section 15 of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018, as read with Regulation 11)
Directive  
Electoral Commission  
PPR13B – Request for Representation   (in terms of section 15 of the Political Party Funding Act, 6 of 2018, as read with Regulation 11)
Request for representation  

____________



Footnotes
1	The notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Copy of the resolution confirming the authority of the signatory as passed by the Executive of the political party; and
(ii) Confirmation of bank account from the relevant financial institution.
2	The Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Copy of the resolution confirming the authority of the signatory as passed by the Executive of the political party; and
(ii) Proof of closure of old banking account; and
(iii) Confirmation of new bank account from the relevant financial institution
3	The Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Proof of Receipt(s) of donation;
(ii) Certified copy of proof of receipt(s) making up donation;
(iii) If Donation-in-Kind:
(a) Copy(ies) of all agreements regulating and governing the loan or services, evidencing the value of the donation; or
(b) List of all expenses paid detailing amounts paid and details of beneficiary of such payments effected on behalf of the political party evidencing the value of the donation.
4	The Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Proof of Receipt(s) of donation;
(ii) Certified copy of proof of receipt(s) making up donation;
(iii) If Donation-in-Kind:
(a) Copy(ies) of all agreements regulating and governing the loan or services, evidencing the value of the donation; or
(b) List of all expenses paid detailing amounts paid and details of beneficiary of such payments effected on behalf of the political party evidencing the value of the donation.
5	Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Copies of Identity Documents of each of the office bearers
6	This Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Proof of Address(es)
7	Notice shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
(i) Copy of Auditor’s IRBA Certificate


End of Document