



(ZA) SI 23 of 29 November 2017:  Establishment of the National Forestry Trust Fund (NFTF) (Government Gazette No. 127)
Nigeria National Subsidiary Legislation


Nigeria National Subsidiary Legislation    >  Nigeria Subsidiary Legislation  >  F  >  Federal Ministry of Environment Act  >  Subsidiary Legislation

This Regulation was published in Nigeria Government Gazette Vol. 104, No. 127 dated 29 November, 2017.
____________
Arrangement of Sections
1. Establishment of the NFTF.
2. Objectives of the NFTF.
3. Functions of the NFTF.
4. Structure of the NFTF Governing Council.
5. Composition of the NFTF Governing Council.
6. Power and Functions of the NFTF.
7. Annual Estimate and Account.
8. Power to Accept Gifts.
9. Tenure of the NFTF Governing Council.
10. Ceasation of Membership of the NFTF Governing Council.
11. Honorarium of the NFTF Governing Council
12. Funding of the NFTF Governing Council.
13. Expenditure of the NFTF Governing Council.
14. Operation of Projects or Programmes.
15. Monitoring and Evaluation.
16. Annual Report.
First Schedule Supplementary Provisions Relating to the Board of Trustee.

____________
PREAMBLE

The high level of deforestation attendant upon unsustainable agriculture practices, Infrastructural expansion, bush burning, de-reservation and over-exploitation of forest estates among others calls for a sustainable implementation of policy direction to address measures at improving reforestation and sustainable management of forests and Trees outside forest landscapes in the Country.

Achieving this target is largely affected by non-availability of sustainable funds for forest management projects arising from competing demands from various sectors for available domestic funds and very limited access to bilateral and multilateral funding (either as loan or grant) as a result of myriads of requirements and complex procedure in the preparation of large scale bankable project or programmes. These problems were highlighted and discussed at the Emergency National Stakeholders meeting on Afforestation on 3rd June, 2016. They also formed a critical part of the deliberations of the Sub-Committee of the Ministry and the National Assembly AD-Hoc Committee on deforestation and the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Afforestation both inaugurated in February, 2017.

These Committees identified and recommended the establishment and operation of National Forestry Trust Fund (‘NFTF’) as one of the solutions to address the issue of funding reforestation and sustainable forest management (SFM) programmes in Nigeria. The Forest Trust Fund is expected to draw its take-off (seed money) from contributions from wood Exporters, States counterpart contributions, CITES fines etc. These recommendations were part of the Actionable Strategies to addressing reforestation, trade in wood-products, sustainable forest management and environmental quality presented to and approved by the National Economic Council (NEC) on the 16th March, 2017 and Federal Executive Council (FEC) on 24th May, 2017 respectively.

NOW THEREFORE
1.     Establishment of the NFTF   There is established the National Forestry Trust Fund (NFTF) under the Federal Ministry of Environment.
2.     Objectives of the NFTF   To carry out reforestation and sustainable management of the Country’s degraded forest estates, reserves and production landscapes to achieve significant increase in forest cover, sustainable production, supply of forest products and services for socio-economic development.
3.     Functions of the NFTF   The National Forestry Trust Fund is established to undertake the following—
(a)   Develop master Plan for reforestation of degraded forest estates, reserves and afforestation of production landscapes (farmland) in Nigeria;
(b)   Provide yearly work plan, implement afforestation, reforestation and sustainable forest management programmes across the States;
(c)   Encourage formation of voluntary forest brigades in collaboration with National Orientation Agency, National Park Services, and State Voluntary Green Brigades, Green Corps etc for purpose of forest protection and boundary patrols;
(d)   Encourage whistle blowers within communities dependent on forest for reducing illegalities and other vices within the forest reserve;
(e)   Encourage development of Community Based Forest Management and Agroforestry practices;
(f)   Undertake a comprehensive Assessment and Mapping of Forest Estates in the Country;
(g)   Investigate and evaluate degraded forest sites referred to it by States and other stakeholders;
(h)   Provide financial support for the Federal Department of Forestry, in monitoring, evaluation, quality control of wood processing factories and other CITES operations for effective documentation of trade in CITES listed flora and fauna; and
(i)   Any other activities relevant to achieving sustainable Forest management in Nigeria.
4.     Structure of the NFTF Governing Council  
(1)    To be chaired at National level by proven Nigerian of high integrity to secure transparency and accountability.
(2)    Secretariat to be provided by Federal Department of Forestry, Abuja.
(3)    Each State level Implementation Unit, to comprise of designated State and Federal Officers of forestry chaired by a representative of a reputable Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) working on forestry and forest resources related matters. The secretariat to be provided by Federal Department of Forestry, field offices.
5.     Composition of the NFTF Governing Council  
(1)    There is established for the National Forestry Trust Fund, a governing Council to be known as National Forestry Trust Fund Governing Council.
(2)    The National Forestry Trust Fund Governing Council shall consist of—
(a)   Chairman;
(b)   Vice Chairman (A State Commissioner in charge of forestry) selected from the geo-political zones on four-year rotational basis;
(c)   Representative of Nigeria Conservation Foundation  Member
(d)   Representative Nigeria Custom Service  Member
(e)   Representative of Saw millers Association of Nigeria   Member
(f)   Representative of Wood Exporters Association of Nigeria  Member
(g)   Director, Federal Department of Forestry  Secretary
(h)   Representative of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture   Member
(i)   Forestry Research institute of Nigeria (FRIN)   Member
(j)   Otuba Niyi Adebayo   Member
(k)   Alhaji Mohammed Danyaro   Member
(l)   Nigeria Environment Study Team (NEST)   Member
(m)   Representative of wood Product section of MAN   Member
(3)    The Chairman, Vice Chairman and 2 members of proven reputation shall be appointed by the Minister of Environment to make up the 13 member of NFTF Governing council.
6.     Power and Functions of the NFTF Governing Council  

The NFTF Governing Council shall—
(a)   Superintend the polices of the National Forestry Trust Fund (NFTF);
(b)   Provide the policy guidelines relating to the functions of the NFTF;
(c)   Guide and steer the NFTF on the strategic processes required for the execution of approved project, in accordance with the terms of Reference (TOR) setting and the process of funding, project selection, and the management of the NFTF;
(d)   Ensure the projection of the interests of players, stakeholders and the public;
(e)   Review and approve project plan, budgets provisions and communication plan for all phases of the execution of an approved project;
(f)   Appoint external auditors to review NFTF’s processes;
(g)   Monitor fund utilisation by NFTF to ensure completion and post completion, maintenance of planting operations and other projects;
(h)   Establish for NFTF an operational structure for execution of approved project;
(i)   Approve and Maintain all staff appointment as recommended by the Secretariat; and
(j)   Perform such other function as given to the NFTF Governing Council by the Minister to achieve the objectives for which it was constituted.
7.     Annual Estimate and Account  

The Ministry shall open and maintain a NFTF Account. The signatories to the account shall be the Permanent Secretary, the Chairman and Secretary to the fund.
(a)   The Governing Council shall not later than 31st March in each year, submit to the Minister, a report of funds received and disbursed in relation to the NFTF activities in the preceding year;
(b)   The Ministry shall keep proper accounts in respect of each year and proper records in relation to the account and shall cause the account to be audited within 3 months after the end of each year by auditors approved by the office of the Auditor-General of the Federations.
8.     Power to Accept Gifts  
(1)    Subject to the approval of the Governing Council, the NFTF may accept gifts of land, money or other property on such terms and conditions, if any, as may be specified by the person and organisation making the gift.
(2)    NFTF Governing Council Members, shall not accept any gift if the conditions attached by the person or organisation making the gift are inconsistent with the objectives of this document, any other law, rule or order governing the code of conduct for public officers.
9.     Tenure of the NFTF Governing Council  

Member of the NFTF Governing Council shall hold office—
(a)   For a term of four years in the first instance and may be re-appointed for a further term of 4 years; or
(b)   On such terms and conditions as. may be specified on the letter of appointment.
10.     Ceasation of Membership of the NFTF Governing Council  
(1)    A member of the NFTF Governing Council shall cease to hold office as a member where the member—
(a)   Resigns his appointment as a member of the Governing Council by notice under his hand addressed to the Minister of Environment;
(b)   Becomes of unsound mind;
(c)   Becomes bankrupt or makes a compromise, with a creditor;
(d)   Is convicted of a felony or of any offence involving dishonesty or corruption;
(e)   Becomes incapable of performing his official duties either arising from infirmity of body or mind;
(f)   Is replaced or resigned from the organisation that nominated him; or
(g)   The Minister of Environment is satisfied that it is not in the interest of NFTF or in the interest of the public for the person to continue in office and the Minister remove him from office.
(2)    Where a vacancy occurs in the membership of NFTF Governing Council, it shall be filled by the appointment of a successor to hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the predecessor; provided that such successors shall represent the same interest as the predecessor.
11.     Honorarium of the NFTF Governing Council  

The members of the Governing Council shall be paid sitting allowance as honorarium and any other allowance, as the Minister will from time to time direct.
12.     Funding of the NFTF Governing Council  
(1)    NFTF shall be funded through—
(a)   Contribution from wood products exporters segregated according to wood products—
(i)   Fully processed export N25, 000/20ft container;
(ii)   Semi processed export N50, 000/20ft container;
(iii)   Charcoal products N18, 750/40ft container; and
(iv)   25% of CITES fines and penalties.
(b)   Grants in-aid from National, bilateral, multilateral agencies or individuals;
(c)   All monies received by NFTF which may in any way become payable or vested in NFTF by way of gifts or testamentary disposition;
(d)   Contribution of 0.005% of Annual budget by the States Government.
(e)   Contributions from wood based domestic industries (saw-millers, furniture and cabinet maker, wood panel industries etc.) and
(f)   Other monies which may from time to time accrue to the NFTF.
13.     Expenditure of the NFTF Governing Council  
(1)    The funds of the NFTF shall be applied towards—
(a)   Achieving the mandate and functions stated in Article 3 of this document; and
(b)   Any purchases made as approved by NFTF Governing Council.
14.     Operation of Projects or Programmes  

The Governing Council shall receive project proposals to be carried out in the various locations from the Federal Department of Forestry, participating States and other Stakeholders. These shall be evaluated by NFTF, subject to the available funds and passed for implementation.
15.     Monitoring and Evaluation  
(1)    A monitoring and evaluation mechanism shall be established and outsourced to experts and civil society organisations to ensure independent feedback.
(2)    The mechanism shall—
(a)   Develop measures and indicators to evaluate all NFTF activities;
(b)   Ensure compliance with all extant laws and regulations governing the fund; and
(c)   Ensure that the project outputs and outcomes meet the required standards and expectations of the NFTF.
16.     Annual Report  

The Governing Council shall prepare and submit to the Minister—
(a)   not later than 31st March in each year, a report as may be directed by the Minister on the activities of NFTF during the preceding year for each approved NFTF project and shall include in the report a copy of the audited account of NFTF and of the audited report there on; and
(b)   An interim report at six months interval before the due date for the annual report.

____________
First Schedule  SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEE  
1.     Proceedings of meetings of the board of trustees  
(1)    Proceedings of the NFTF Board of Trustee—
(a)   Meetings of the NFTF shall be held at least once every 4 months unless otherwise agreed by the NFTF Board of Trustee.
(b)   Notice of meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee shall be issued by the Chairperson to the members of the Board of Trustee at least 14 days prior to the meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee.
(2)    The Notice shall specify the date, time and agenda in detail of the meeting and attach any supporting documents.
(3)    The NFTF shall meet for the conduct of its business at such places and on such days as the Chairperson may appoint.
(4)    Every meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee shall be presided over by the Chairperson and where the Chairperson is unable to attend a particular meeting, any of the Vice-Chairperson nominated by the Chairperson shall preside at the meeting.
(5)    Each member of the NFTF Board of Trustee shall be entitled to require the Chairperson to include additional items on the agenda by written notice to the Chairperson and the other members of the NFTF Board of Trustee not less than 7 days prior to the meeting of the NFTF and attach any supporting documents.
(6)    For any meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee, the period of notice stipulated in this schedule may be waived with the consent in writing of all members of the NFTF Board of Trustee.
(7)    Each member of the NFTF shall have one vote on all matters for decision.
(8)    One or more members of the NFTF board of Trustee may participate in and vote at a meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee by means of video conference which allows all persons participating in the meeting to hear and communicate with each other.
(9)    Each member shall, within 14 days after receiving drafts of minutes of any meeting, return the minutes with its comments to the Secretary who shall within 30 days thereafter forward the final draft to the member of the NFTF Board of Trustee.
(10)    The minutes of each meeting shall be approved by the NFTF Board of Trustees at the next meeting and copies thereof shall be furnished to all member of the NFTF Board of Trustees.
2.     Personal Interest  

Any member of the NFTF Board of Trustees who has a personal interest in any contract or agreement entered into or proposed to be considered by the NFTF Board of Trustees shall resign with immediate effect.
3.     Quorum  
(1)    The quorum of any meeting of the NFTF Board of Trustee shall be 7 members including the Chairman of the NFTF Board of Trustees.

____________


End of Document
(ZA) SI 23 of 29 November 2017:  Establishment of the National Forestry Trust Fund (NFTF) (Government Gazette No. 127)
Page 7 of 7


