



(ZA) GN 1140 of 19 September 2008:  Devices to be used for drug testing and the procedure to be followed (Government Gazette No. 31417)
South Africa National Subordinate Legislation


National Subordinate Legislation  >  ZA Subordinate Legislation  >  S  >  South African Schools Act, No. 84 of 1996  >  Rules and Regulations  >  Notices

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

I, Grace Naledi Mandisa Pandor, Minister of Education, in terms of section 8A of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996), hereby identify the devices to be used for drug testing and the procedure to be followed in using them, as set out in the Schedule.

(Signed)

GRACE NALEDI MANDISA PANDOR, MP

MINISTER OF EDUCATION

DATE: 22-07-2008

SCHEDULE
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS
1. Introduction
2. List of devices
3. Other relevant information
4. procedure to be followed
5. Information about each device
6. Date of commencement
Annexure A Other relevant information to be considered before the drug testing device may be used
Annexure B Guidelines for random search and seizure and drug testing at schools

1.     INTRODUCTION   (1) Section 8A (11) of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996), provides that—

“The Minister must—

(a)   identify the device with which the test contemplated in subsection (8) is to be done and the procedure to be followed; and
(b)   publish the name of this device, and any other relevant information about it, in the Gazette.”

(2) The Minister has identified 10 devices.

(3) A school may use any one of these devices.

(4) The Minister may, by publication in the Gazette, make changes to the list of devices identified.

2.     LIST OF DEVICES   The list of devices identified is the following:

(1) DRUG DETECTIVE WIPE DETECTION SYSTEM FOR SURFACES

(2) ONE STEP HOME COCAINE TEST STRIP

(3) MULTI-DRUG TEST

(4) QUICKTOX DRUG SCREEN DIPCARD TEST

(5) MONITECT DRUG SCREEN CASETTE TEST

(6) TOXCUP DRUG SCREEN CUP TEST

(7) MULTI PANEL DRUG TESTING DEVICE

(8) SMART CHECK DRUG SCREEN TEST

(9) DRUG SMART CUP

(10) AVITAR ORAL SCREEN 4 OR DRUGOMETER

3.     OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION   Other relevant information to be considered before a drug testing device may be used is contained in ANNEXURES A and B.
4.     PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED   (1) The devices must be kept at the school under lock and key.

(2) The testing kit must be opened in the presence of both the learner who is about to be tested and the witness.

(3) A learner who is about to be tested must first be asked whether he or she has taken any medicine.

(4) The test must be conducted

(a) by a person of the same gender as the learner;

(b) in the presence of an adult witness of the same gender as the learner; and

(c) out of sight of any other person.

(5) The person conducting the test must wear latex gloves.

(6) The principal or his or her delegate must, in the presence of both the learner and the witness, read the information contained in the package insert before the test is conducted.

(7) The test must be conducted as prescribed in the package insert.

(8) The package insert of each device indicates how the result of that test is to be interpreted.

5.     INFORMATION ABOUT EACH DEVICE  
5.1 DRUG DETECTIVE WIPE DETECTION SYSTEM FOR SURFACES   (1) Drug Detective—

(a) is a single-use disposable test for which no urine sample is required;

(b) is a rapid screening test for the qualitative detection of a wide variety of drugs; and

(c) allows for the testing of—

(i) solid surfaces such as a hand, the inside of a lined pocket, a table top, a computer keyboard or a cellphone keypad;

(ii) plant material or fragments of tablets;

(iii) liquids; and

(iv) powders or resins.

(2) The kit is capable of detecting many variations of different classes of drugs of abuse, including the following:

(a) Amphetamines (AMP);

(b) cocaine (COC) and crack;

(c) marijuana or cannabis (THC);

(d) methamphetamine (MET);

(e) opiates (OPI) (morphine and heroin and codeine); and

( f ) methadone (MTD).

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) When a surface is to be tested for drug residue, it is wiped with a little sponge.

(b) When plant material or tablet fragments are tested, they are placed inside the collection tube.

(c) When a liquid is tested, it is collected with the sponge and deposited in the collection tube.

(d) When a powder is tested, it is scraped up with a small spatula and deposited in a buffer tube.

(e) In all four cases, at the end of the procedure, drops of a prepared liquid are applied to the test device.

( f ) There is a waiting period of 10 minutes, after which the result can be read.

(4) Other relevant information

(a) The kit, in its foil pouch, must be stored at room temperature – which is above – 2°C and below 35°C – must not be frozen, and must not be exposed to sunlight.

(b) The test result, which is available within 10 minutes, is only a qualitative, preliminary analytical result.

(c) A secondary analytical method can be used to obtain a confirmed result.

5.2 ONE STEP HOME COCAINE TEST STRIP   (1) One Step Home Cocaine Test Strip is used for the qualitative detection of the cocaine metabolite in human urine.

(2) The test strip should remain in the sealed pouch until use.

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) Collect the urine specimen in a clean and dry container.

(b) Remove the test strip from the sealed pouch and use it immediately.

(c) Hold the test strip vertically – that is, with the arrows pointing towards the urine specimen.

(d) Immerse the test strip in the urine specimen for 10 seconds.

(e) Do not immerse the test strip beyond the maximum line (“MAX”).

( f ) Place the test strip on a non-absorbent flat surface and start the timer.

(g) Wait for the red line or lines to appear.

(h) Read the result after five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

(a) The test provides only qualitative, preliminary results.

(b) A secondary test must be used to obtain confirmed results.

(c) The test does not distinguish between drugs of abuse and certain medications.

(d) A procedural control is included in the test.

5.3 MULTI-DRUG TEST   (1) Multi-Drug is a rapid, one-step screening test for the simultaneous, qualitative detection of multiple drugs and drug metabolites in human urine.

(2) Owing to the speed and sensitivity of this test, it is the most widely accepted method of testing urine for multiple drugs of abuse.

(3) This test device is a lateral-flow chromatographic assay for the qualitative detection of many variations of classes of drugs of abuse, including the following:

(a) Amphetamine (AMP);

(b) barbiturates (BAR);

(c) methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA);

(d) propoxyphene;

(e) methadone (MTD);

( f ) methamphetamine (MET);

(g) oxycodone (OXY);

(h) benzodiazepine (BZO);

(i) morphine;

( j) opiates;

(k) phencyclidine or angel dust (PCP);

(l) buprenorphine;

(m) cocaine (COC);

(n) marijuana or cannabis (THC); and

(o) tricyclic antidepressants.

(4) Summary of procedure

(a) Leave the test device and control pouch outside the refrigerator for 10 minutes to reach room temperature before testing.

(b) Remove the test device from the sealed pouch.

(c) Place the test device on a clean and level surface.

(d) Hold the dropper vertically and transfer three full drops of urine to each specimen container of the test device.

(e) Start the timer.

( f ) Avoid trapping air bubbles in the specimen container.

(g) Wait for the coloured line or lines to appear.

(h) Read the results after five minutes.

(5) Other relevant information

(a) Multi-Drug provides only qualitative, preliminary analytical results.

(b) A secondary analytical method must be used to obtain confirmed results.

(c) GCMS is the preferred confirmatory method.

(d) The test does not distinguish between drugs of abuse and certain medications.

5.4 QUICKTOX DRUG SCREEN DIPCARD TEST   (1) This is a one-step qualitative assay that provides easily interpretable results within five minutes.

(2) The test can accurately detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Amphetamine (AMP);

(b) barbiturates (BAR);

(c) benzodiazepines (BZO);

(d) cocaine (COC) and crack;

(e) marijuana or cannabis (THC);

( f ) methamphetamine (MET);

(g) methadone (MTD);

(h) opiates (morphine and heroin and codeine) (OPI);

(i) oxycodone (OXY); and

( j) phenylcyclidine or angel dust (PCP).

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) Remove the test device from the sealed pouch.

(b) Remove the bottom cover to expose the test strips.

(c) Dip the sample pads of the test device straight into the urine sample for a minimum of 10 seconds.

(d) Remove the test device from the urine sample and re-attach the bottom cover.

(e) Place the device on a level surface.

( f ) Read the results once the control band appears and the membrane clears – that is, after approximately five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

The results are stable and may be interpreted up to one hour after the control band appears.

5.5 MONITECT DRUG SCREEN CASETTE TEST   (1) This rapid, sensitive test has become the most widely accepted method of urine-based screening for drugs of abuse.

(2) The test can accurately detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Marijuana or cannibis (THC);

(b) cocaine or benzoylecgonine (COC);

(c) morphine ( OPI);

(d) methamphetamine (MET);

(e) amphetamine (AMP);

( f ) phencyclidine or angel dust (PCP);

(g) oxazepam (BZO);

(h) secobarbital (BAR);

(i) methadone (MTD);

( j) nortriptyline (TCA);

(k) 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA); and

(l) oxycodone (OXY).

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) Draw the urine sample up in the pipette.

(b) Dispense three drops of urine into the sample container.

(c) Take care to avoid adding drops of urine that contain air.

(d) Interpret the result after five minutes.

5.6 TOXCUP DRUG SCREEN CUP TEST   (1) This is a one-step test for the rapid qualitative detection of drugs of abuse.

(2) Toxcup can effectively detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Amphetamine (AMP);

(b) barbiturates (BAR);

(c) benzodiazepines (BZO);

(d) cocaine or benzoylecgonine (COC);

(e) marijuana or cannabis (THC);

( f ) methamphetamine (MET);

(g) opiates (morphine and heroin and codeine) (OPI);

(h) oxycodone (OXY); and

(i) phencyclidine (PCP).

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) Remove the test lid from the sealed pouch.

(b) Twist the test lid securely onto the specimen cup after collection.

(c) Lean the cup on its side to activate testing.

(d) Read the results once the control band appears and the membrane clears – after approximately five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

The results are stable for up to one hour after the control band appears.

5.7 MULTI PANEL DRUG TESTING DEVICE   (1) This is a one-step test for the rapid qualitative detection of drug abuse.

(2) The device can effectively and accurately detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Methamphetamine (MET);

(b) amphetamine (AMP);

(c) heroin, morphine;

(d) cocaine;

(e) marijuana, cannabis; and

( f ) MDM (Ecstasy)

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) The urine specimen must be collected in a clean and dry container.

(b) Urine collected at any time of the day may be used.

(c) Read the results after five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

The results must not be interpreted after more than 10 minutes.

5.8 SMART CHECK DRUG SCREEN TEST   (1) This is a one-step test for the rapid qualitative detection of drug abuse.

(2) The device can effectively and accurately detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Methamphetamine (MET);

(b) amphetamine (AMP);

(c) heroin, morphine;

(d) cocaine; and

(e) marijuana, cannabis.

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) The urine specimen must be collected in a clean and dry container.

(b) Urine collected at any time of the day may be used.

(c) Read the results after five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

The results must not be interpreted after more than 10 minutes.

5.9 DRUG SMART CUP   (1) This is a one-step test for the rapid qualitative detection of drug abuse.

(2) The device can effectively and accurately detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Amphetamine (AMP);

(b) marijuana (THC);

(c) barbiturate (BAR);

(d) oxazepam (BZO);

(e) opiates (OPI);

( f ) metamphetamine (MET);

(g) methodone (MTD);

(h) phencylidine (PCP);

(i) cocaine (COC); and

( j) oxycodone (OXY).

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) The subject simply urinates into the collection cup and closes the lid.

(b) The results are ready in five minutes.

(4) Other relevant information

A new device should be used for each urine test to avoid cross-contamination of urine.

5.10 AVITAR ORAL SCREEN 4 OR DRUGOMETER   (1) The oral fluid method detects parent drug rather than metabolites.

(2) Avitar can effectively detect the following drugs of abuse:

(a) Cocaine;

(b) opiates;

(c) marijuana or cannabis; and

(d) methamphetamine.

(3) Summary of procedure

(a) Bring the pouch to room temperature.

(b) Make sure that the person being tested has had nothing in their mouth for at least five minutes before sample collection.

(c) Collect the oral fluid sample by removing the collector from the package, sliding the plastic hood back and exposing the foam.

(4) Other relevant information

Read the results after 15 minutes.

6.     Date of commencement   The list of devices to be used for drug testing takes effect on the date of publication in the Government Gazette.
Annexure   A OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION TO BE CONSIDERED BEFORE THE DRUG TESTING DEVICE MAY BE USED  
1. INTRODUCTION   The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, provides for a Bill of Rights. The following rights are relevant to random search and seizure and drug testing at schools:

Human dignity (section 10)

Privacy (section 14)

Property (section 25)

Random search and seizure and drug testing would obviously infringe on these rights. However, the Constitution itself provides that no right is absolute, given that any right in the Bill of Rights may be limited in terms of section 36. Section 36 (1) of the Constitution provides, “The rights in the Bill of Rights may be limited only in terms of law of general application to the extent that the limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society based on human dignity, equality and freedom”.

Section 8A of the South African Schools Act, 1996, is a law of general application in that it applies to all schools and is aimed at safeguarding the interest of learners with regard to their right to education, which must take place in an environment free of drugs and dangerous objects. Given that section 8A limits certain rights conferred in the Bill of Rights, it must be implemented with due regard to human dignity, privacy and the right to property of the learners concerned.  
2. SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS THAT MIGHT POINT TO POSSIBLE DRUG USE  
2.1 Physical indicators   (a) Changes in level of activity – periods of lethargy (common with dagga, alcohol, sedatives, cocaine and heroin) or periods of hyperactivity (common with dagga, stimulants and alcohol).

(b) Drastic increase or decrease in appetite.

(c) Unexplained increase or decrease in weight.

(d) Lack of coordination, staggering or slow movements, dropping of objects, clumsiness and falling.

(e) Altered speech patterns: slurred or garbled speech, expressionless speech, abnormally fast speech, forgetting of thoughts and ideas, incomplete sentences and incoherent conversations.

( f ) Unusual shortness of breath, persistent cough, strange odour to breath and clothes (often with dagga and inhalants).

(g) Red-rimmed, bloodshot or watery eyes, drooping eyelids.

(h) Little sores around the mouth and unexplained chapped or cracked lips (inherent users).

(i) Yellow or brown stains on hands.

( j) Continuously runny nose and constant fidgeting with nose.

(k) Unexplained bleeding of nose.

(l) Increased susceptibility to infections and colds.

(m) Changes in sleeping habits: staying up all night but sleepy all day, or restless sleep.

(n) Changes in physical appearance: drastic changes in style of clothes, less concerned about appearance, which may become sloppy and unkempt.

(o) Severe agitation, lack of concentration.

(p) Unexplained shaking, tremors, nausea, vomiting and sweats or chills (may be an early withdrawal symptom).

(q) Distortion of perception of time.

(r) Reaction time slower; child becomes sluggish.

(s) Needle marks made by intravenous injection of drugs. If a child has such marks, he or she may start wearing long-sleeved shirts even in hot weather.

(t) Unexplained and ongoing headaches.

(u) Drowsiness, especially during the day.

(v) Unusually dreamy, absent demeanour.

(w) Unusually or constantly dry mouth, or exaggerated or constant thirst.

2.2 Behavioural indicators   (a) Sudden aggressive and violent behaviour, unexplained outbursts of anger.

(b) Unexplained restlessness.

(c) Destructive behaviour, e.g. punching walls, swearing, fighting.

(d) Unexplained irritability.

(e) Lack of motivation – sudden loss of interest in hobbies or sport previously enjoyed.

( f ) Ongoing episodes of unexplained giggling.

(g) Sudden apathy towards life in general.

2.3 Emotional indicators   (a) Sudden unexplained and ongoing nervousness.

(b) Low self-esteem.

(c) Decreased sense of responsibility.

(d) Sudden feelings of depression, despondency and hopelessness.

(e) Severe mood alterations, or mood swings, from euphoria to sudden anxiety and depression, and sudden hypersensitivity.

( f ) Alterations in thought patterns – strange and bizarre thinking, hallucinations, paranoid delusions, abnormal suspiciousness, depressed thoughts, suicidal thoughts.

2.4 Social indicators   (a) Sudden withdrawal from family and friends.

(b) Sudden secretiveness, deviousness, vagueness, lies and deceit.

(c) Sudden change in friends, with the new friends usually older and/or suspected of using drugs, and a reluctance to introduce friends to family.

(d) Drop in school performance – overall lack of motivation with regard to schoolwork.

(e) Regular truancy, especially on Mondays – school attendance register can be utilised to obtain an overall view of absenteeism.

( f ) Resentment towards all authority and disregard of all rules (at school, home, etc.).

(g) Disappearing for periods of time without being able to account for that time, e.g. coming home late at night or missing classes at school.

(h) Unusual interest in money.

(i) “Lost” clothes or equipment, or money that cannot be accounted for.

Annexure   B GUIDELINES FOR RANDOM SEARCH AND SEIZURE AND DRUG TESTING AT SCHOOLS  
1. Introduction   Search and seizure is based on the principles of common sense. It is a procedure that is conducted within the confines of an in loco parentis relationship between the educator and the learner. The focus is on identifying the drug abuse problem, and learners who are victims of a dependency must be assisted, as provided for in the system. The Guidelines are aimed at establishing a disciplined and purposeful school environment dedicated to the improvement and maintenance of the quality of the learning process.
2. Random search and seizure and drug testing at schools   2.1 General guidelines

2.1.1 The principal may authorise the presence on the school premises of dangerous objects, such as scissors, needles and knives, for legitimate educational purposes (section 8A(1)), and of medicines prescribed by a doctor. However, all these objects must be kept strictly under lock and key.

2.1.2 The principal or his or her delegate may at random search a group of learners only after a fair and reasonable suspicion has been established (section 8A(2)). The following may be an indication of the presence of illegal drugs and dangerous objects at a school:

(a) Whistleblowers informing the principal about their presence.

(b) Scent of dagga on the school premises.

(c) Reports from parents.

(d) Traces of drugs on the school premises.

(e) Threats of the use of dangerous objects against other learners.

( f ) Injury as a result of the use of such objects.

(g) Any other reasonable indication.

In the absence of such indications, the principal may not conduct random search and seizure and drug testing.

2.1.3 The principal or his or her delegate must conduct the search in a manner that is reasonable and proportional to the suspected illegal activity (section 8A(3) (b)). The following serves as an illustration of this provision:

(a) Where there is a suspicion that learners have illegal drugs or dangerous objects in their school bags or lockers, the random search must be directed at the learners’ school bags and lockers only and may not be extended to their bodies.

(b) Where there is a suspicion that learners are carrying illegal drugs or dangerous objects in their pockets or elsewhere in their clothing, only their clothing and pockets may be searched, and not their property (such as school bags and lockers).

(c) (i)  If there is doubt about where the illegal drugs and/or dangerous objects are hidden, the search must initially be directed at the belongings, such as school bags and lockers, of the group of learners.   (ii) If nothing is found in the school bags and lockers, the search may be directed at the clothes and body.
3. The approach to search and seizure   3.1 The search must be conducted by the principal or his or her delegate, if he or she is of the same gender as the learner.

3.2 The search must be conducted in a private area.

3.3 The search must not be conducted in the presence of other learners.

3.4 The search must be conducted in the presence of an adult witness of the same gender as the learner.

3.5 The object or drug found on the learner or in his or her property should be photographed whenever it is reasonable practicable to do so.

(Editorial Note: Wording as per original Government Gazette. It is suggested that the word “reasonable” is intended to be “reasonably”.)

3.6 The search must not be extended to a search of any body cavity of the learner, and the learner’s private parts may not be touched.

4. Practical steps to search and seizure   4.1 How to conduct a search

4.1.1 If learners’ clothes and/or school bags are to be searched, the search must be conducted in an empty and clean space, such as the principal’s office, and each learner must have his or her own school bag(s) with him or her.

4.1.2 If lockers are to be searched, the principal or his or her delegate must ensure that every learner stands next to his or her locker.

4.1.3 Where possible, a witness must be identified for each learner to be searched.

4.1.4 While the learner is awaiting his or her turn to be searched, the witness must observe the behaviour of the learner.

4.1.5 The witness must also identify what other property (for example, a locker) belongs to the school and is available for the learner to use. If there is such an item of school property, the witness must find out its identification (for example, a locker number).

4.1.6 The learner and the witness must be allowed into the principal’s office (out of sight of other learners), and the learner must be requested to reveal any illegal drug or dangerous object in his or her possession.

4.1.7 If the learner does not at this point voluntarily hand over any illegal drug or dangerous object in his or her possession, he or she must be requested to empty his or her pockets (jacket/trousers) and school bag or sports bag.

4.1.8 While the learner’s arms are stretched out, the person conducting the search must do a superficial body search – that is, he or she must frisk the learner. Under no circumstances may a learner’s private parts be touched.

4.1.9 As a last resort, the learner must be requested to strip down to his or her underwear, and then the clothes handed over must be searched for suspicious objects.

4.1.10 If, at this point, it is suspected that the learner has swallowed a suspicious object, it is advisable for the matter to be handed over directly to the police.

4.2. How to handle a special request by a learner to leave the area

4.2.1 An urgent need to use the bathroom should, under all normal circumstances, be the only acceptable reason for requesting to leave the area.

4.2.2 Bring this request to the attention of the person in charge of the search by knocking on the closed door of the room in which the search is taking place or by phoning the person in charge.

4.2.3 Attempt to accommodate the learner by arranging for that specific learner to be the next one to be searched.

4.2.4 If it is not feasible to search that learner next, the learner must, as a last resort, be allowed to go to the bathroom, but the witness must accompany him or her and must have the learner in his or her sight the whole time.

4.2.5 If the person in charge of the search leaves the room in which a learner is being searched in order to deal with the special request of another learner, the witness with the learner inside the room must be cautioned to observe any suspicious conduct by the learner, who is not allowed to walk around but must remain in one place. The witness must note down any suspicious conduct on the part of the learner.

4.3 Management of possible interruption during the search

The search may not be disrupted by telephone calls to the learner, the witness or the person conducting the search, or in any other way. However, phone calls in connection with 4.2.1 above and 4.6.1 and 4.6.2 below are allowed.

4.4 Time of search

4.4.1 When the possession of a dangerous object is suspected, it is best to conduct the search early in the morning.

4.4.2 The search must be done in a structured manner and evidence must be noted down.

4.4.3 It is advisable not to disrupt classes, especially where it is feasible to plan ahead – for example, where information has been received that learners will bring dangerous objects to school the next morning.

4.4.4 Ensure that the search and seizure is done effectively, timeously and at a reasonable time, so as not to allow the learners the opportunity to use the dangerous objects.

4.5 Delegation in case the principal is not available

4.5.1 Two persons, one female and one male, must be delegated to perform the search and seizure function in case the principal is not available. The names of these persons must be reflected in a log book and must be known at all times, so that there will be certainty about whose responsibility it is to act in the principal’s absence. The following is an example of the delegation, which must be in writing:

“I,  , principal of   (name of school), hereby authorise X (female educator’s name) and Y (male educator’s name) to be responsible for search and seizure in my absence. I hereby delegate to X and Y the same authority that I as principal have, and he or she may give instructions about a search, and conduct a search, on my behalf.”

4.5.2 The delegated persons must have insight into the process of search and seizure. No formal training is needed; reading these guidelines is sufficient. If the delegated person is uncertain about any part of the search procedure, he or she must, before conducting the search, again read the guidelines attentively to ensure that he or she knows exactly how to conduct the search. A copy of these guidelines must be available at the principal’s office at all times.

4.5.3 If the principal will be away for a long period, for example on study leave, vacation leave or sick leave, a formal acting appointment can be made in his or her place, and the person so appointed will have the same authority as the principal.

4.5.4 If the principal will be absent only temporarily, he or she must, before leaving, identify the person delegated (who may be appointed as delegate on a permanent basis), so that everybody knows who the principal’s delegate is as far as searches are concerned.

4.5.5 If the principal did not identify a delegate before he or she left, he or she may do so, and may instruct such delegated person, by phone. Such delegations made and instructions given by phone must be written down by the delegate in a logbook at the school.

4.5.6 A search and seizure operation cannot be cancelled or postponed because the principal is not available.

4.6 How to deal with a learner who is unwilling to be searched

4.6.1 If reasonably practicable, the parent should be telephoned or a message should be sent to the parent in some other way to inform the parent that the learner is unwilling to cooperate in a lawful search and seizure procedure as provided for by the South African Schools Act, and that the learner will be handed over to the police.

4.6.2 If the parent indicates that he or she is willing to participate by instructing the learner to cooperate in a search and seizure that is being conducted in terms of section 8A, where the outcome is linked to an internal disciplinary process, the parent may be given a reasonable opportunity to come to the school and to instruct the learner to cooperate. A parent may also give such instruction to the learner and to the principal over the phone. As is the case during the rest of the search and seizure process, a witness must be with the learner while such a phone conversation takes place. It is vitally important that the principal communicate with the parent and that the principal explain the basis for the search and seizure according to the provisions of section 8A.

4.6.3 If either the learner or the parent refuses to cooperate, the matter, and the learner, must be handed over to the police, so that they may conduct a search in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act. The outcome of such a search is linked to a Criminal Court Process with possible criminal prosecution.

4.7 How to deal with an emergency that involves circumstances not necessarily provided for in section 8A

4.7.1 At an ordinary school it might happen that an emergency occurs in which one cannot make use of the normal procedures and the principles of section 8A and of the Safety Regulations.

4.7.2 The emergency might be that a situation arises for which the procedure has not yet been instituted, or that, while the procedure is being instituted, a learner takes out a dangerous object and starts wounding other people or damaging school property. The emergency might even be that a learner, with or without a dangerous object in his or her possession, starts making serious threats against another person or other persons.

4.7.3 Calm the situation down. Get everyone out of reach or sight of such a learner.

4.7.4 Negotiate with the learner, taking into account the following issues:

(a) Do not take action that could worsen the situation even further.

(b) Try to persuade him or her to hand over any dangerous object.

(c) Assure him or her that his or her parent has been called to resolve the situation or that he or she may phone whomever he or she wants (there might be other people than the parent whom he or she trusts).

(d) Calm him or her down, and plead with him or her to talk about the matter.

(e) Try to persuade him or her not to endanger any person or property and, if there are hostages, try to negotiate a position in which the problems can be discussed without endangering the lives of such persons.

( f ) Assess the situation and, if it deteriorates even slightly or if the learner does not agree to calm down, call the police immediately.

4.7.5 Always negotiate from a safe position.

5. Seizure   5.1 The procedure to be followed after seizing a dangerous object, as stipulated in section 8A(5) to (7), must be followed to the letter.

5.2 The outcome of this procedure may be a disciplinary process, which may result in a punitive sanction.

6. Guidelines   6.1 These guidelines must be used in conjunction with Annexure A to the Notice. Measures that precede testing, such as identifying a learner who may be using drugs – for instance, one who is sleepy or displays a lack of concentration – must correspond with Annexure A, and subsections (2), (3), (8), (9), (10), (12), (13) and (14) of section 8A of the South African Schools Act must govern the circumstances under which and the procedure according to which such testing may be done.

6.2 The approach must be sensitive to the rights of the leaner. Request the learner to come to the office without humiliating him or her in public, and ensure that an adult witness is present when you talk to the learner in your office.

(Editorial Note: Wording as per original Government Gazette. It is suggested that the word “leaner’ is intended to be “learner”.)

6.3 Always treat all aspects of drug testing as confidential, so as not to humiliate the learner or expose his or her drug habit, which would infringe on his or her human rights.

6.4 Always test a group of learners; never concentrate on individuals.

6.5 “Group” means more than one person without limiting the number of persons, although the bigger the group is, the more complex and involved the testing becomes.

7. The approach to drug testing   7.1 Drug testing must be conducted—

7.1.1 by the principal, if he or she is of the same gender as the learner; or

7.1.2 by the principal’s delegate, who must be of the same gender as the learner, if the principal is not of the same gender as the learner or is not available to do the search himself or herself;

7.1.3 in a private area and not in view of other learners;

7.1.4 in the presence of an adult witness of the same gender as the learner; and

7.1.5 by using an unused device, in kit form, identified by the Minister in the Government Gazette.

8. Practical steps to drug testing   8.1 The principal or his or her delegate must remove the drug testing device from its sealed packaging in the presence of the learner and the adult witness.

8.2 The principal or his or her delegate must order the learner to provide a sample of urine.

8.3 The principal or his or her delegate must apply the method prescribed on the testing device to test the urine sample for illegal drugs.

9. Recording of information and disposal of dangerous objects, illegal drugs and urine samples   9.1 Any dangerous object or illegal drug that has been seized or urine sample that has been tested must be clearly and correctly labelled with full particulars, including—

(a) the name of the learner in whose possession it was found or whose sample was taken;

(b) the time and date of search and seizure or sample taken;

(c) an incident reference number;

(d) the name of the person who searched or tested the learner;

(e) the name of the witness; and

( f ) any other details that may be necessary to identify the item and the incident.

9.2 All the details must be recorded in the school record book.

9.3 After the dangerous object has been seized, the principal or his or her delegate may hand the object to either the police or the parent.

9.4 If the object that has been seized is illegal, the principal or his or her delegate is obliged to hand it to the police.

9.5 The principal or his or her delegate must take the object concerned to the nearest police station if the police cannot collect it.

9.6 The police officer who receives the object must issue a receipt to that effect.

10. Notices to parents and disciplinary proceedings   10.1 The principal or his or her delegate must, within one working day after testing or searching the learner, inform the parent about the test or search that was conducted.

10.2 The principal or his or her delegate must inform the parent and the learner about the result of the test or search.

10.3 If the learner has tested positive for illegal drugs, a discussion must be held with the parent so that he or she may understand the consequences of the use of illegal drugs. The principal may, if the parent so requests, refer the learner to a rehabilitation institution for drug counselling.

10.4 The principal or his or her delegate may initiate disciplinary proceedings against the learner in whose possession a dangerous object has been found or who has tested positive for illegal drugs. No criminal proceedings may be instituted against the category of learners.

10.5 The situation would be different in a case where the learner refused to be searched or tested for drugs. In this instance, the principal or his or her delegate must inform the police, who would take the relevant steps in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977.

11. Counselling   11.1 Counselling must be done by social workers and NGOs as identified in the National Policy on the Management of Drug Abuse by Learners in Public and Independent Schools and Further Education and Training Institutions, promulgated under General Notice No. 3427 of 2002 (Government Gazette No. 24172 of 13 December 2002.)

The Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill, 2008, is serving before Parliament. Once enacted, the provisions of this legislation will play an important role in identifying treatment centres and facilities to assist the school in dealing with the problem of drug abuse.

11.2 Schools must identify social workers in their own provincial departments, and must obtain the contact details of those social workers. If those officials cannot assist, schools must seek the cooperation of social workers connected to the national Department of Social Development and its provincial offices, and of NGOs that offer such services at rates that parents can afford. This would fall under the provisions of regulation 9 (5) and (6) of the Regulations for Safety Measures at Public Schools, published in Government Gazette No. 22754, under Government Notice No. 1040 of 12 October 2001.

12. Outcome must be kept confidential   12.1 Only the learner and his or her parent must be informed about the outcome of the drug test.

12.2 The identity of the learner may not be revealed, except to his or her parent.

13. Confirmation   13.1 If the result of a test conducted at school is disputed, a secondary test by means of gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC/MS) must be done to confirm the result.

13.2 This sophisticated test should be done with the assistance of the Department of Health.

13.3 In terms of this process—

13.3.1 search and seizure may be done only in respect of a group, and not in respect of an individual; and

13.3.2 when an individual is suspected, and only when there is a clear link between an illegal activity and an individual, that individual may be searched and any illegal object found in the possession of that person may be seized, but in such a case, the provisions of the Safety Regulations will apply.

____________



End of Document