



(ZA) CREDIT CONTROL AND DEBT COLLECTION POLICY
MP By-laws, Policies and Tariff
[LOCAL AUTHORITY NOTICE NO. 51 OF 2018.]
[DATE OF COMMENCEMENT: 12 JULY, 2018.]


MP By-laws, Policies and Tariff   >  MP By-laws, Policies and Tariffs  >  Emakhazeni Local Municipality  >  Policies
      

This Policy was published in Provincial Gazette Extraordinary No. 2948 date 12 July, 2018.
    
              

LOCAL AUTHORITY NOTICE 51 OF 2018
                    

EMAKHAZENI LOCAL MUNICIPALITY
                    

CREDIT CONTROL AND DEBT COLLECTION POLICY
                    

APPROVED BY COUNCIL ON: 31/05/2018
                    

IMPLEMENTATION DATE: 01/07/2018
          
TABLE OF CONTENTS
        
Introduction        
Definitions        
Objectives        
Scope of Application        
Legislative Framework        
Principles        
Credit Control        
Debt Management        
Unauthorised connection of water/electricity supply        
Roles and Responsibilities        
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting        
Application of the policy        
Implementation      

Introduction  

Vision and value statement
                                    

It is the vision of Council to “be a developmental local municipality striving to accelerate provision of quality services to the satisfaction of our communities.
                          

Council is committed to its mission to improve the quality of life of its citizens by providing accelerated services and creation of conducive environment for economic growth through good governance, innovation and integrated planning
                                      

The Values of the Council are—

Consultation

Service Standards

Access

Courtesy

Information

Transparency

Redress

Value for money
                                      

Vision
                          

A developmental local municipality striving to accelerate provision of quality services to the satisfaction of our communities
                                                            

Mission
                          

Emakhazeni Local Municipality exist to improve the quality of life of its citizens by providing accelerated services and creation of conducive environment for economic growth through good governance, innovation and integrated planning
                                    
Definitions  

Definitions—
“billing”  refers to the process of charging for services provided by issuing accounts;
“chief financial officer”  means a person designated in terms of section 80 (2) (a) of the Municipal Finance Management Act;
“credit control”  refers to the performance of certain basic credit worthiness checks prior to a municipal service being provided and deposits collected;
“debt collection”  means the pursuing of uncollected debts that are past the due date;
“disconnection”  means interrupting the supply of water or electricity to a debtor as a consequence of ignoring the demand for payment;
“dispute”  refers to the instance when a debtor questions the correctness of any account rendered by the municipality to him/her and such debtor lodges an appeal with the municipality;
“due date”  means the final date of payment as shown on the account;
“effective disconnection”  means the physical removal of pipes and/or equipment as a consequence of unauthorized reconnection of the disconnected service;
“financial year”  means the municipality’s financial year ending 30 June;
“holistic”  refers to the combining of all debt in order to establish the total obligation the debtor has to The municipality;
“indigents”  are debtors whose households have been evaluated in terms of the Indigent Policy and who is registered as being indigent;
“indigent amount”  refers to the applicable value of the indigent subsidy as determined by the Municipality from time to time;
“legal process or procedures and/or legal action”  refers to the process and/or action described in the Magistrate Courts Act No. 32 of 1944; Supreme Court Act No. 59 of 1959; Adjustment of Fines Act No. 101 of 1991; Debt Collectors Act No. 114 of 1998, Criminal Procedures Act No. 51 of 1977; Local Government: Cross-Boundary Municipalities Act No. 29 of 2000, Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Act No. 33 of 2000; Local Government: Municipal Systems Act No. 32 of 2000;
“mayor”  means the councilor elected as the executive mayor of the municipality in terms of section 55 of the Municipal Structures Act; ;
“the municipality”  means Emakhazeni Local Municipality;
“municipal manager”  means a person appointed in terms of section 82 (1) (a) or (b) of the Municipal Structures Act;
“payment”  is any form of redemption towards the balance on an account as per Receipts policy 7.1 “permissible methods of payments.
“sundry debt”  refers to any debt other than for rates, housing, metered services, sewerage and refuse removal;
“supply”  means any metered supply of water or electricity;
“tampering”  means the unauthorized reconnection of a supply that has been disconnected for nonpayment, the interference with the supply mains or bypassing of the metering equipment to obtain an unmetered service; and
“total household income or household income”  refers to the total formal and informal gross income of all people living permanently or temporarily on the property on which the account is based.
Objectives  

The objectives of this policy are to—
•  provide a framework for the municipality with regard to credit control, debt management, debt impairment and debt write off.
•  ensure that all the moneys due to the municipality are effectively and efficiently collected;
Scope of Application  

This Policy applies to all administrations within the defined boundaries of Emakhazeni Local Municipality and all debtors of these administrations, including employees and Council members of the Municipality.
Legislative Framework  

The policy has been formulated in terms of section 96 (b) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act.
Principles  

Human dignity must be upheld at all times.
                          

The policy must be implemented with equity, fairness and consistency.
                
6.3              Details related to the debt and the account of the debtor must be correct at all times.          
                  

The implementation of this policy should be based on sound business practices. This includes debt collection through sanctions of warnings, disconnections, and other legal processes.
                          

The municipality may provide reduced levels of service to manage the debt growth where alternatives are available.
                          

All disconnection / reconnection costs incurred by The municipality relating to the collection process shall be recovered from the debtor. In instances where the municipality incurs legal cost those may be recovered from the debtor as well.
                          

Interest on outstanding debt will be charged on all consumers at prime rate for the 2018/ 2019 financial year
                                      

Employer deductions
                          

The current account outstanding on municipal invoices on properties where municipal employees as well as municipal as well as arrear amounts councillors reside will be deducted from their salaries on a monthly basis.
                                    
Credit Control  

APPLICATION FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICES
                                    

All applicants for provision of municipal services must pay prescribed deposit as reflected in the municipal tariffs list approved by Council.
                          

The applicant is required to submit Municipal Services Application Form together with the ID document for identification. If an owner is opening a second account then all the outstanding invoiced amount has to be settled prior to opening a new account. Before a municipal account is closed outstanding balance has to be settled.
                          

The Property Owner is fully and legally responsible for payment of all municipal services for his / her property on a monthly basis.
                          

At the time of applying for municipal services, the property owner must sign the application form as evidence of acknowledging the debt with the municipality.
                          

Before any property can be transferred from one owner to another, the account must be settled, after which the municipality will issue a Clearance Certificate to that effect, No property transfer can take place without the issue of a Clearance certificate.
                          

Once the Clearance Certificate has been issued only then can new rates and services account be applied for by the new owner.
                          

Application for services for businesses must include the submission of a resolution delegating authority to the applicant and furnishing the business entity’s registration number. The names, addresses and all relevant contact particulars of all the entity’s directors or members or trustees or proprietors or partners must be submitted with the resolution.
              
Debt Management  

MUNICIPAL TRADING SERVICES
                                    

Accounts for municipal services must be paid by the due date which is on /before the 05th of each month.
                          

The debtor must be warned by any communication means as elected by the municipality of possible disconnection if payment is not received by the due date.
                          

If payment is not received by the due date, notice shall be delivered to physical address/post office/sms/e-mail, warning of the impending disconnection after 7 days from date of the notice.
                          

If payment is not received by the due date as shown on the notice, then the supply of services will be discontinued.
                          

Council reserves the right to deny or restrict the sale of electricity or water to customers who are in arrears with their property rates or any other municipal service charges.
                          

The reconnection of services will be done upon receipt of total balance amount specified on the notice including a reconnection fee.
                          

Disconnected services will be restored within a reasonable period of time after the debtor produces proof of payment of the required amount.
                          

All arrangements with the debtors should strive to result in an agreement that is sustainable and is most beneficial to the municipality. No arrangements may be entered into with regards to the current invoiced amount as well as arrears effective from 1 January 2017.
                          

All debtors that are in arrears and wish to apply to make arrangements to reschedule their debt will be subjected to the payment arrangements contained in this policy.
                          

A staff member or a Councilor of the Municipality may not be in arrears to the municipality for rates and service charges for a period longer than three (3) month
                          

Each consumer query will be dealt with according to its merit/circumstance whereby corrections on the accounts will done according to the agreement reached between the client and the municipality.
                          

The onus shall always be on the debtor to request reconnection and to provide proof that the full amount on the disconnection notice was paid or that an arrangement was entered into.
                                      

PREPAID ELECTRICITY
                                    

A debtor consumer may only purchase pre- paid electricity once their current invoiced amount is paid (This included arrears from 1 January 2017.)
                          

Municipality will produce a quarterly report of all municipal prepaid consumers who are not purchasing electricity on a monthly basis. The report is called the Prepaid Electricity Consumption Exception Report.
                          

Municipal Technicians or an appointed contractor will perform physical inspection of all the properties of all the properties appearing on the Prepaid Electricity Consumption Exception Report .Prohibition of access by the residence will results in the municipality, taking steps against such consumer
                          

Municipality will investigate and consider root causes for a consumer to be on the Prepaid Electricity Consumption Exception Report.
                                      

TAMPERING WITH THE MUNICIPAL PREPAID ELECTRICITY METER
            
(a)                    First tampering                —
•  A penalty based on the approved Municipal Tariff list must be paid with immediate effect and the meter be removed , plus;
•  Average charge of the consumer / or consumer’s residing in the same of three months consumption will be affected over the period of non-payment.
•  Criminal Charges may be instituted
            
(b)                    Second tampering                —
•  Removal of the circuit breaker, and;
•  Replacement of meter after payment of penalty based on approved Tariff list
•  Plus, average charges. of the consumer / or consumer’s residing in the same of three months consumption will be affected over the period of non-payment.
•  Criminal Charges may be instituted
            
(c)                    Third tampering                —
•  Removal of municipal electricity cable from the property ,and,
•  Replaced after a payment of penalty based on approved Tariff list
•  Plus, average charges of six months consumption of the consumer / or consumer’s residing in the same of three months consumption will be affected over the period of non-payment.
•  Criminal charges may be instituted.
•  After which a Municipality will accept a new application for services.
                                    

The municipal services will remain suspended until the municipal account is settled in full.
                                      

FINE FOR ILLEGAL CONNECTION
            
(a)  Illegal connection of previously disconnected services as a result of non – payment will result in the debtor being required to pay the full outstanding amount on the municipal account.
            
(b)  No arrangement may be entered into for illegal connections and/ or meter tampering. The debtor will also be required to pay outstanding arrears on municipal account prior to reconnection of any services.
                                                

WHISTLE BLOWING
            
(a)  An amount of R 500 may be payable by Council subject to the following—
•  The whistle blower’s name be kept confidential
•  The whistle blower’s information leads to the removal of the meter tempered with
•  The amount is payable upon the removal of the meter and not upon payment by the illegal connector
•  Monies of R500.00 payable for whistle blowing; will be added to the fine to the consumer whom has illegally tampered.
                                    

The payment of whistle blowing is to be approved by the municipal manager.
                                      

BLOCKING OF ELECTRICITY PRE-PAID METER
                          

Once a pre- paid meter has been blocked the current invoiced amount on municipal account as well as arrears effective from 1 January 2017 are payable.
                                                            

BACK DATED MUNICIPAL RATES AND SERVICES
            
8.7.1                  The municipality may, if it is found that the relevant consumer of services has been undercharged and or unmetered and or unbilled and for a period of time irrespective of the reason, the municipality will charge the consumer for the period as determined but not exceeding three (3) years, from the date that the consumer is made aware of the back charge in writing by the municipality.              
8.7.2                  The municipality will calculate the back charges based on the three months consumer profile from the meter correction, billing correction, meter installation, data correction or any other reason that led to the discrepancy. In the event that consumer information is not comprehensive then an average of consumers’ who reside in the same area may be used.              
8.7.3                  The consumer may pay the back dated municipal rates and service charges in one installment or may enter into an arrangement to pay this amount off in equal installments for a period that will be approved by the municipality.              
                                                

DISCRETION: NEGOTIABLE AMOUNTS
            
(a)  Discretion in terms of arranged amounts as per this policy is delegated to the Chief Financial Officer.
            
(b)  Discretion will only be used so as to apply the principles embodied within this policy and to ensure that some form of payment acceptable to The municipality is forthcoming from arrangement with the debtor.
                                                

RIGHT OF ACCESS
            
(a)  An authorised representative of, or service provider to The municipality, must at all reasonable hours be given unrestricted access to the debtor’s premises in order to read, inspect, install or repair any meter, service or service connection for reticulation, or to disconnect, reconnect, stop or restrict the provision of any service.
            
(b)  Any person who contravenes paragraph (a) above will be deemed to have contravened the provisions of section 101 of the Municipal Systems Act, No. 32 of 2000, as amended, and will be charged with an offence and attract the penalties referred to in section 119 of the said Act and services will be disconnected until such time that the penalty is paid and access is granted.
                                                

OTHER DEBT
                                                

Employee debt
            
(a)  Definition                                  

Employee debts include any debt owed to the Municipality by an official or former official which originated while the debtor was/is in the employ of the Municipality, and any other debt classified as such by the Chief Financial Officer.
                              
            
(b)  Management of employee debt                
                  
•                      A debt account must be opened on the approved financial system when a debt has not been settled within 30 days of notification of such debt to the debtor.                                    
•                      It is the responsibility of officials entrusted with the collection of debt to take all possible steps to recover the debt by—

 
(i)  Notifying the debtor of the amount payable
(ii)  Sending of monthly statements; and
(iii)  Sending of reminders for payments outstanding/overdue.
                                    
•                      If no response is received the following steps must be taken—

 
(i)  A reminder must be sent per registered mail/e-mail/sms and the registered mail nr/sms number/e-mail address/ must be noted on the file copy of the letter;
(ii)  if no response is received on the reminder sent as mentioned above in (c) (i), legal steps must be taken to recover the debt; and
                                  
              
            
(d)  Tracing of employee debtors                
                  
•                      The following institutions/persons, although not the only, can be approached in an endeavour to obtain a debtor’s current address.

 
(i)  Other Municipalities
(ii)  Post Offices
(iii)  The Department of Home Affairs
(iv)  Relatives
                                    
•                      If enquiries to at least 2 or more of the above-mentioned institutions are unsuccessful such debt may be referred to 3rd party debt collectors for recovery.                                  
              
                                                

ARRANGEMENTS
                                                

Principles for Debtor
            
(a)  Current charges must be paid in full and is not negotiable.
            
(b)  Debtors who default on three occasions in respect of arrangements made will be denied the privilege of making further arrangements and the full amount becomes payable. All services may be disconnected and legal action will be taken against such debtors.
                                                

Arrangement criteria for debtors
            
(a)  All debtors who are in arrears and apply to make arrangements to reschedule their debt will be subjected to the following conditions at the time of making arrangement with the municipality—

First arrangement
•  Payment of Current account, plus
•  Payment of initial amount of 30% of the total outstanding debt, after which the agreement will be signed by both parties.
•  The monthly instalment must be current account and the outstanding amount as agreed upon with municipality.
            
(b)  Each following month the debtor will be required to pay—
•  Current account, plus,
•  An instalment as agreed upon.
            
(c)  Should the debtor not honour the FIRST arrangements, municipal services will be disconnected.
•  Arrangements on first default—
•  Payment of current account plus 30% of the outstanding debt
•  Arrangements on second default—
•  Payment of current account plus 50% of the outstanding debt.
•  Arrangements on third default—
•  Payment of current account plus 100% of the outstanding debt.
            
(d)  Principles for Non-residential debtors
•  If any non-residential debtor wishes to make an arrangement for a period of not longer than six months, and will pay the first instalment immediately, and ensure that the current account is paid in full immediately throughout the period of the arrangement. All outstanding amount as from 1 July 2016 will attract interests.
•  interest on the arrangement amount may be suspended as long as the terms of the arrangement are maintained.
•  Non-residential debtors may make arrangements to liquidate their arrears where it would be financially beneficial to the Municipality for them to do so.
•  The final decision to make these arrangements will rest with the Accounting Officer.
•  For all non residential payment defaulters customer using below 50kVA capacity the council will switch their payment mode from convention to prepaid.
                                                

Consequences of failure to comply with arrangements
                                    

Failure to comply with the agreed arrangements will result in disconnection of service. Services will only be reconnected after a full outstanding amount on the account is paid. Legal processes will be instituted to areas where the municipality is not providing electricity.
                          

No further arrangement can be entertained by the municipality if the debtor is handed over to the lawyers.
                                      

DISPUTE
                                                

Procedure to be followed in terms of a dispute—
                          
              
                                                                        

Debtor
                                                                                                                                          

Municipality
                                                                                        
(1)  The debtor must render the dispute in writing to The municipality.
                      
(2)  No dispute will be registered verbally.
                      
(3)  The debtor must furnish his/her full personal particulars (including his/her account number and direct contact details).
                      
(4)  The full nature of the dispute must be described in the above correspondence.
                      
(5)  The onus will be on the debtor to ensure that he/she receives a written acknowledgement of the dispute.
                                                                  

On receipt of the dispute, the following action are to be taken—
(1)  All Administrations must keep a register in which all disputes received are to be entered.
(2)  The following information should be reflected in the register—
•  Debtor’s account number
•  Debtor’s name
•  Debtor’s address
•  Debtors e-mail address
•  Full particulars of the dispute
•  Name of the official to whom the dispute is given to investigate and resolve
•  Actions that have/were taken to resolve the dispute
•  Signature of the controlling official
(3)  An authorised controlling official will keep custody of the register and conduct a weekly check and follow-up on unresolved disputes.
(4)  A written acknowledgement of receipt of the dispute must be provided to the debtor.
(5)  All appeals regarding disputed amounts must be unilaterally concluded by The municipality’s authorised officials within 30 working days from receipt thereof.
                                          
(a)  The municipality’s authorised official’s decision is final and will result in the immediate implementation of any debt collection and credit control measures provided for in this policy after the debtor has been notified of the outcome of the appeal.
            
(b)  The same dispute will not be considered and will not again be defined as a dispute.
            
(c)  If the debtor is not satisfied with the outcome of the appeal, he/she may under protest pay the amount in dispute and redress his/her action to a court of law.
                                                

LEGAL ACTION
            
              
•                  Legal proceedings may be instituted by the Municipality to recover arrear amounts on service accounts where                            
•                  Disconnection action yielded no satisfactory result                            
•                  Disconnection action is not possible due to the nature of the services that are provided by the municipality                          
                                                

IRRECOVERABLE DEBT
            
(a)  Debt will be regarded as irrecoverable if—
•  All reasonable steps have been taken to recover a specific outstanding amount; or
•  Debts where, in the view of the Municipality, further expenses to collect such debt are not justified in relation to the amount of the debt and possibility of collection;
•  Debts where a legal opinion to the municipality has indicated that the amount involved does not warrant the prospective costs of action to collect or where legal action will be uneconomical.
•  the cost to recover the debt does not warrant further action; or
•  the amount outstanding is the residue after payment of a dividend in the rand from an insolvent estate; or
•  a deceased estate has no liquid assets(estate) to cover the outstanding amount; or
•  it has been proven that the debt has prescribed(expired); or
•  the debtor is untraceable; or
•  the debtor cannot be identified so as to proceed with further action; or
•  Debts where liability has not been admitted by the debtors and where the success of proceedings to collect is unlikely; and
•  The Municipal Manager is convinced that recovery would cause undue hardship to the debtor or his/ her dependants.
•  Where debt cannot be proven or substantiated
            
(b)  Debt will not be regarded as irrecoverable if
•  The outstanding debt can be corrected in line with GRAP 3 (example: administrative errors due to billing).
            
(c)  Irrecoverable debts will be reviewed on an annual basis.
                                                

DECEASED ESTATES
                          

The Executor of a Deceased Estate shall be liable for payment of all debts on the property.
                                                            

DEBT WRITE OFF
            
(a)  All irrecoverable debt (as per section 10 of this policy) will be submitted for write-off.
            
(b)  All write-offs will be submitted to council on an annual basis, unless otherwise directed.
            
(c)  Write offs will be charged against provision for bad debts account in the Statement of Financial Position.
            
(d)  All write-off submissions shall include the relevant debt information such as names, account number, amounts, regions and wards and criteria met to qualify as irrecoverable debt.
            
(e)  All submitted write-offs will be submitted to internal audit for review, whom shall then forward it to Audit Committee for recommendations.
            
(f)  All write-offs should be submitted to internal committee structures and approved by council.
                                                

IMPAIRMENT OF CONSUMER DEBTORS
            
(a)  The Municipality will use the risk scoring method to calculate its debt impairment.
            
(b)  All impairment of debtors will be accounted for in terms of GRAP standards.
            
(c)  All impairment movement/s will be expensed directly to the Statement of Financial Performance.
                                                

DISCLAIMER
                                    

Municipal Council will be under no obligation to write off any debt and will always have the sole discretion to do so.
              
Unauthorised connection of water/electricity supply  

The municipality is unlawfully and unfairly deprived of its benefits and income due to illegal connections by consumers.

The unauthorised reconnection of, or tampering with, a service supply is considered a criminal office which may result in legal action being taken.

INSPECTION
(a)  The municipality will from time to time send a team of employees and or appointed service providers, to inspect illegal connections.
(b)  The municipality shall issue a notice to the consumer to be available on a day specified by The municipality.
(c)  If the consumer fails to adhere, the water/electricity supply will be effectively disconnected.
(d)  The municipality shall incur no liability for any loss sustained as a result of these processes or termination.
(e)  The inspection will and is not limited to or confined to The municipality trading hours or working days.
(f)  The municipality shall have an unlimited right of access to premises in which such services are rendered.

FINE / PENALTY

The municipality shall within 7 working days of removal or disconnections issue a fine.

The following punishment will be handed down—
(a)  First time illegal connectors—

Meter infrastructure will be removed and a fine in line with Council approved tariff list will be payable.
(b)  Second time illegal connectors—

Meter cables will be removed and a payable fine in line with Council approved tariff list will be payable.
Roles and Responsibilities  

              Mayor            
                                    

A municipality’s mayor shall—
(a)  oversee and monitor—
(i)  the implementation and enforcement of the municipality’s credit control and debt collection policy and any by-laws enacted; and
(ii)  the performance of the Accounting Officer in implementing the policy and any by-laws;
(b)  when necessary, evaluate or review the policy and any by-laws, or the implementation of the policy and any such by-laws, in order to improve efficiency of its credit control and debt collection mechanisms, processes and procedures; and
(c)  at such intervals as may be determined by the municipal report to a meeting of the council, except when the council itself performs the duties mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b).
                                      

              Accounting Officer            
                                    

The Accounting Officer shall—
(a)  implement and enforce the municipality’s credit control and debt collection policy and any by-laws enacted;
(b)  in accordance with the credit control and debt collection policy and any such bylaws, establish effective administrative mechanisms, processes and procedures to collect money that is due and payable to the municipality; and
(c)  at such intervals as may be determined by the municipal report the prescribed particulars to a meeting of the supervisory authority.
                          

The accounting officer of a municipality shall be responsible for the management of the revenue of the municipality.
                          

The accounting officer shall take all reasonable steps to ensure—
(a)  that the municipality has effective revenue collection systems consistent with section 95 of the Municipal Systems Act and the municipality’s credit control and debt collection policy;
(b)  that revenue due to the municipality is calculated on a monthly basis;
(c)  that accounts for municipal tax and charges for municipal services are prepared on a monthly basis, or less often as may be prescribed where monthly accounts are uneconomical;
(d)  that all money received is promptly deposited in accordance with the Municipal Finance Management Act into the municipality’s primary and other bank accounts;
(e)  that the municipality has and maintains a management, accounting and information system which—
(i)  recognises revenue when it is earned;
(ii)  accounts for debtors; and
(iii)  accounts for receipts of revenue;
(f)  that the municipality has and maintains a system of internal control in respect of debtors and revenue, as may be prescribed;
(g)  that the municipality charges interest on arrears, except where the municipality has granted exemptions in accordance with its budget-related policies and within a prescribed framework: and
(h)  that all revenue received by the municipality, including revenue received by any collecting agent on its behalf, is reconciled at least on a weekly basis.
                          

The accounting officer shall immediately inform the National Treasury of any payments due by an organ of state to the municipality in respect of municipal tax or for municipal services, if such payments are regularly in arrears for periods of more than 30 days.
                                      

Senior managers
                                    

Each senior manager of a municipality and each official of a municipality exercising financial management responsibilities shall take all reasonable steps within their respective areas of responsibility to ensure that all revenue due to the municipality is collected.
              
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting  

The accounting officer of a municipality shall by no later than 10 working days after the end of each month submit to the mayor of the municipality and the relevant provincial treasury a statement in the prescribed format on the state of the municipality‘s budget reflecting the actual revenue, per revenue source following particulars for that month and for the financial year up to the end of that month.
                          

The accounting officer should furthermore include an explanation of—
(a)  any material variances from the municipality’s projected revenue by source, and from the municipality’s expenditure projections per vote;
(b)  any material variances from the service delivery and budget implementation plan; and
(c)  any remedial or corrective steps taken or to be taken to ensure that projected revenue and expenditure remain within the municipality’s approved budget.
                          

The above statement must include a projection of the relevant municipality’s revenue and expenditure for the rest of the financial year.
              
Application of the policy  

All services of the municipality as well as all infrastructure used to deliver this service belong to municipality. The Municipality can monitor, upgrade, or remove its infrastructure without notifying and or seeking approval from the consumer.

The municipality reserves the right to differentiate between different categories of consumers, debtors, services or service standards when applying this Policy. The municipality will on application of the credit control policy avoid discrimination as forbidden by the Constitution, unless it is established that the discrimination is fair as allowed by the Constitution. No debtor (excepted for approved Indigent consumers) may be exempted from credit control action as a sign of goodwill for any period of time as this is in contravention of the action applied in this policy and the Credit Control principles contained in the Municipal Systems Act No. 3 of 2000.
12.2  Should there be any conflict between these By-laws and any other by-laws of municipality, this By-laws prevail.
Implementation  

This Credit Control and Debt Collection Policy will be adopted and implemented at the start of the financial year after Council approval.

Approved on: 31/05/2018
Council Resolution nr:38/05/2018

End of Document
(ZA) CREDIT CONTROL AND DEBT COLLECTION POLICY
Page 19 of 19


