



64 Specific cases of automatically unfair dismissal provided for by section 187(1)
The Law of South Africa (LAWSA)


LAWSA  >  The Law of South Africa (LAWSA)  >  Labour Law: Part 2  >  Annual Cumulative Supplement 2024  >  Resolution of Labour Disputes: Unfair Dismissal of Employees
64   Specific cases of automatically unfair dismissal provided for by section 187(1)

NEW NOTE 1A: An employee of a foreign diplomatic mission claimed damages for unfair dismissal but the former employer claimed immunity even though dispute flowed from a contract concluded in South Africa. The mission contended that the court lacked jurisdiction because it enjoyed immunity under the Foreign States Immunities Act 87 of 1981. The court noted that one of the exceptions allowed by the Foreign States Immunities Act is that immunity will not be enjoyed in respect of proceedings relating to contracts of employment between a foreign state and an individual concluded in South Africa if the work is performed in this country, except where the employee forms part of, inter alia, the administrative or technical or service staff of a mission: Pitya v United States of America 2023 8 BLLR 833 (LC).

NOTES 19–22: Section 187(1)(c) has been introduced into the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1996 as a means of regulating lockouts. A lockout is defined as the exclusion by an employer of employees from the workplace with the purpose of compelling the employees to accept a demand in respect of any matter of mutual interest. This definition narrows the ambit of a lockout as previously defined, and does not include a termination lockout. The scheme regulating lockouts does not deal with whether or when operational requirements may justify dismissing employees who refuse to accept a demand, as is expressly allowed in the case of protected strikes. In Fry’s Metals (Pty) Ltd v NUMSA 2003 2 BLLR 140 (LAC) provided that where a dismissal is final and irrevocable, it does not fall within the scope of section 187(1)(c). Section 187(1)(c) had been amended in 2014 in response to Fry’s Metals. It now renders automatically unfair a dismissal if the reason is “a refusal by employees to accept a demand in respect of a matter of mutual interest”, rather than “to compel the employees to accept a demand”. The amended section 187(1)(c) has a restricted purpose and a limited reach. It shifts attention from the employer’s intention to employee’s refusal, making the purpose of the dismissal irrelevant. The amended version does not state whether it remains permissible for the employer to invoke sections 189 or 189A to dismiss employees who refuse to accept a demand linked to operational needs. Section 187(1)(c) must be read with the other provisions regulating dismissals, in particular section 188. Even where there is evidence suggesting a credible possibility that the dismissal was for a prohibited reason, the employer is still entitled to prove that the dismissal was for a more proximate fair reason: National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa v Aveng Trident Steel (A Division of Aveng Africa (Pty) Ltd 2019 9 BLLR 899 (LAC).

NOTES 19–20: Prior to the amendment of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 s 187(1)(c) in 2014 dismissal was prohibited if it was designed to compel employees to accept a demand relating to a matter of mutual interest. This did not prevent employers from retrenching for operational reasons, provided that they followed the requirements of section 189 and the dismissals were final and irrevocable. Judgments in which the original version of section 187(1)(c) had been applied had exposed an anomaly; employers would be discouraged from re-employing workers retrenched for refusing to accept changed terms and conditions of employment or working arrangements. The amended version was merely designed to cure this anomaly, not to change its scope. A careful reading of the amended provision read with its explanatory memorandum indicated that employers are still permitted to dismiss employees for rejecting a demand related to the employer’s operational requirements. Section 187(1)(c) does not suggest that simply because a proposed change was refused and dismissal followed, the reason for the dismissal was the refusal to accept the proposed change. The true reason for the dismissal must be determined. Courts must guard against disguised retrenchments where employers attempt to use their power to dismiss to advance objectives in the context of collective bargaining: National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa v Aveng Trident Steel (a division of Aveng Africa (Pty) Ltd 2021 1 BLLR 1 (CC). See also National Union of Metal Workers of South Africa v Aveng Trident Steel (a division of Aveng Africa (Pty) Ltd) 2021 2 BCLR 168 (CC).

NOTES 23–24: Whether or not a dismissal is automatically unfair entails an inquiry into causation and establishing whether the reason for the dismissal is prohibited by the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 s 187(1). This entails a two-step inquiry into whether the dismissal would have occurred had the appellant not taken action against the respondent; if not, whether the respondent’s conduct was the main or most likely cause of the dismissal. Section 187(1)(d)(i) proclaims dismissals automatically unfair if the reason for the dismissal was that the employee “exercised any right in terms of this Act”. The filing of an internal grievance is not an action taken by an employee under the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995; it is nothing more than a request by an employee to resolve an internal problem. If an employee were dismissed solely for filing a grievance, the dismissal would undoubtedly be unfair: DBT Technologies (Pty) Ltd v Garnevska 2020 9 BLLR 881 (LAC).

NOTE 23: The Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 s 187(1)(d) renders a dismissal automatically unfair if the employer acts contrary to section 5 or if the reason for the dismissal is, inter alia, that the employee had taken action against the employer by exercising any right conferred by the Act or participated in any proceedings in terms of the Act: Sweet (James) v Namcon Logistics (Pty) Ltd 2021 1 BLLR 104 (LC).

NOTE 32: See Brian Joffe t/a J Air v Commission for Conciliation Mediation & Arbitration 2019 1 BLLR 1 (LAC) (no agreed retirement age).

NOTE 36: See DF Network Africa (Pty) Ltd v Faris 2019 2 BLLR 127 (LAC) (employer failed to take adequate steps to accommodate employee’s religious beliefs).

NOTE 43: Once a dismissal is shown to fall within the scope of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 s 187(1), the employer is precluded from raising a defence that it was fair. However, employers are entitled to show that the reason for the dismissal was not one envisaged in section 187(1). The Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 defines a protected disclosure as the disclosure of any information made by an employee who has reason to believe that a person is failing to comply with a legal obligation. The Protected Disclosures Act also provides that an occupational detriment includes the dismissal of an employee on account, or partly on account of having made a protected disclosure. The Protected Disclosures Act does not require that disclosures be factually correct or that the employee has personal knowledge of the information disclosed. Employers who act inappropriately against whistle blowers should be fittingly sanctioned: Baxter v Minister of Justice and Correctional Services 2020 10 BLLR 968 (LAC).

NEW NOTE 43A: Employers who purport to retrench employees must prove that the dismissal was due to economic, technical or structural reasons. The legislature could never have envisaged dismissals for operational requirements to be laced with corruption and activities calculated to further state capture or purging employees for ulterior motives: Mashilo v Commissioner of the South African Revenue Service 2022 12 BLLR 1119 (LC).


End of Document
64 Specific cases of automatically unfair dismissal provided for by section 187(1)
Page 2 of 2


