



Marx and others / Servest Group (Pty) Ltd t/a Servest Hygiene [2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GATW 10519-11
Date: 25/07/2012
Before: GS Jansen van Vuuren, Senior Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(ii) of the LRA
Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration — Jurisdiction — CCMA lacking jurisdiction to entertain claim of alleged constructive dismissal because cause of employees’ resignation was employer’s unilateral reduction of employees’ commission rate — Proper remedy was industrial action.
Dismissal — Constructive — Employees resigning and claiming constructive dismissal after employer unilaterally reduced sales commission — Employer’s conduct not providing claim for constructive dismissal because dispute in reality over wages, and proper remedy industrial action.

Editor’s Summary


The applicants, all sales representatives, resigned after the respondent informed them of its intention to reduce the commission component of their salaries, claiming that they had been subjected to a unilateral change of terms and conditions of employment, and that they had been constructively dismissed. The respondent contended that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to entertain the dispute.

The Commissioner noted that, while the dispute resolution provisions of the LRA may give the impression that they are “employee driven”, in the sense that jurisdiction is determined by the manner in which the employee characterises the dispute, the courts have now held that jurisdiction is determined by the true nature of the dispute. Although the applicants had claimed that they were unaware of the reasons for their dismissal because they did not know why the respondent had reduced their commission structure, they had referred a dispute concerning alleged constructive dismissal. The applicants’ claim rested on the proposition that the respondent had rendered their employment intolerable by breaching their contracts of employment. While it was unnecessary for present purposes to decide whether the change of the commission rate constituted a breach of contract, the Commissioner accepted that breaches or repudiations of contracts may be grounds for claims of constructive dismissal. However, the breach or repudiation did not in itself provide a basis for a claim of constructive dismissal. The applicants had to show that the employer had rendered the employment relationship intolerable. The respondent’s alleged failure to consult did not constitute an unfair labour practice, as the applicants claimed. Nor does the LRA itself provide any protection against unilateral changes to terms and conditions of employment, save for temporary orders to stay them while the parties bargain. The applicants had not chosen that path, or to strike to oppose the change. Had they done so, the commission would have lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate. The Commissioner found that the matter was in truth a dispute of interest, and that the applicants could not circumvent the limitations and underlying philosophy of the LRA by claiming that they had been constructively dismissed.

The Commissioner ruled that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate.

 
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1162

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The proceedings were conducted at the Metro Park Building in Pretoria on 25 June and 18 July 2012. The applicants were represented by Mr G van der Merwe whilst the respondent was represented by Mr C Beckenstrater. Both of them are attorneys. 
The proceedings were recorded digitally.

Background
The following applicants referred a dispute to the Commission on 26 August 2011:
Karin Marx (now Breetzke) 
Juliana Lambertha Yssel
Dorothea Regina Steyn
Marcelle Petra Steyn
Anita Perring
Huibrecht Elizabeth Tietz
Jacques Gysbert Geldenhuys
All the applicants (with the exception of Ms Perring) described the nature of the dispute as a unilateral change to terms and conditions of employment as well as constructive dismissal. Ms Perring mentioned only constructive dismissal. The applicants all claimed that they had been (constructively) dismissed on 31 July 2011. 
The matter was set down for con-arb on 12 September 2012. The respondent objected to the con-arb procedure, but attended the proceedings. The matter could not be resolved and a certificate of non-resolution was issued. The Commissioner certified that this was a dispute about constructive dismissal.
The said constructive dismissal dispute was then set down for arbitration on 10 November 2011, but it was postponed at the request of the applicants. This also happened on 4 June 2012 and the matter was eventually set down before me for arbitration on 25 June 2012.
Mr Van der Merwe at the outset of the proceedings advised me that Ms Dorothea Regina Steyn no longer wished to proceed and that she was withdrawing her referral to the Commission.
Mr Van der Merwe also indicated that it was the implementation of a less favourable commission structure which had prompted the applicants to resign from the respondent’s service and the following questions, inter alia, arose:
Was this not primarily a dispute concerning a unilateral change to terms and conditions of employment as contemplated in section 64(4) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) ? 
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1163
Did the alleged unilateral change to the applicants’ terms and conditions of employment constitute a breach of contract?
Was this not primarily a mutual interest dispute?
Did the Commission have jurisdiction to arbitrate in this dispute?
Mr Beckenstrater, in fact, submitted that this case could set a dangerous precedent. In cases where wage negotiations fail, where an employer refuses to grant wage increases or where remuneration is reduced the employees should not be allowed to resign or walk away, claiming that they have been constructively dismissed because their employer has made continuous employment intolerable.
I then agreed to adjourn the matter with a view to affording the attorneys an opportunity to address me on these issues and they did so on 18 July 2012. The parties agreed that these were jurisdictional issues which had not yet been determined and Mr Van der Merwe was (in terms of rule 22) required to prove that the Commission had jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute.

The agreed facts
The parties (for the purpose of this ruling) agreed upon the following facts:
The applicants were all sales representatives who sold hygiene services. 
All the applicants had written contracts of employment which contained clauses relating to their basic salaries as well as certain allowances. These contracts made no mention of any commission but the applicants did earn commission in addition to their basic salaries.
Commission was paid in accordance with a commission structure announced annually. The commission structure for 2011 was contained in the respondent’s “Rental Sales Commission Package (F 2011)” and it was applicable to all the applicants.
The said Rental Sales Commission Package (hereinafter referred to as “the Structure”) contained a clause which stipulated that it formed an integral part of the applicants’ letters of appointment and service contracts. The applicants were also told the Structure formed part of their conditions of service. They all accepted that.
The Structure also contained a clause in terms of which the respondent reserved “the right to make amendments from time to time in order to give clarity or protect its interests”.
The respondent during 2011 discussed the implementation of a new commission structure with the sales representatives on a number of occasions. It was the applicants’ case that this did not constitute proper and fair consultation. 
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1164
The respondent on 5 July 2011 circulated an internal memo, advising the applicants of the implementation of an amended commission structure in terms of which their commission would be substantially reduced.
Some sales representatives (including the applicants) found this unacceptable and resigned, but some of their colleagues stayed. The applicants resigned during July or August 2011, but they did not necessarily resign on the same date. (The respondent did not accept the contention that the applicants had resigned because of the introduction of the amended commission structure.)

The applicants’ submissions

Mr Van der Merwe submitted as follows.

The Commission is a creature of statute. Section 115(1) of the Act, inter alia, provides as follows:

“The Commission must –

(a) attempt to resolve, through conciliation, any dispute referred to it in terms of this Act;
(b) if a dispute that has been referred to it remains unresolved after conciliation, arbitrate the dispute if-
(i)  parties to a dispute in respect of which the Labour Court has jurisdiction consent to arbitration under the auspices of the Commission;”
The dispute in casu is about constructive dismissal – ie dismissal as contemplated in section 186(1)(e) of the Act. The applicants requested the Commission to arbitrate and that is what the Commission has to do. Section 191(5) of the Act, inter alia, provides as follows:

“If a council or a Commissioner has certified that the dispute remains unresolved, or if 30 days have expired since the council or the Commission received the referral and the dispute remains unresolved –

the council or the Commission must arbitrate the dispute at the request of the employee if –
(i) . . .
(ii) the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is that the employer made continued employment intolerable or the employer provided the employee with substantially less favourable conditions or circumstances at work after a transfer in terms of section 197 or 197A, unless the employee alleges that the contract of employment was terminated for a reason contemplated in section 187;
(iii) the employee does not know the reason for dismissal;
(iv) the dispute concerns an unfair labour practice;”
Subsections 191(5)(a)(iii) and (iv) of the Act are also applicable. The applicants did not know the reason for their dismissal (because they did not know why the respondent had changed the commission structure) and the dispute also concerned an unfair labour practice.
The respondent was entitled from time to time to amend (and even reduce) the commission payable to the applicants, but not to the extent that  
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1165
  it was done in July 2011. The respondent on that occasion unfairly and unilaterally amended the commission structure in a manner not contemplated by the parties and that constituted an unfair labour practice as well as a repudiation of their contracts of employment.
The respondent’s failure to properly consult with the applicants was unfair and that provided a sufficient basis for a claim of constructive dismissal. The Labour Appeal Court in Van der Riet v Leisurenet Ltd t/a Health & Racquet Club [1998] 5 BLLR 471 (LAC) held that an employer’s failure to consult with an employee about his demotion warranted a claim to the effect that he had been constructively dismissed.
The fact that it was a breach of the applicants’ contracts of employment which had rendered their continued employment intolerable did not prevent them from claiming that they had been constructively dismissed.
The Labour Court did not have exclusive jurisdiction in regard to breach of contract. The Court derived its jurisdiction to adjudicate in such matters from section 77(3) of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act 75 of 1997, but the Transkei High Court in Runeli v Minister of Home Affairs and others 2000 (2) SA 314 (Tk) [also reported at [2000] JOL 7415 (Tk) – Ed ] held that the Labour Court did not have exclusive jurisdiction in regard to all matters covered by the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995. Mr Van der Merwe submitted that those disputes in respect of which the Labour Court had exclusive jurisdiction were the only disputes in respect of which the Commission lacked jurisdiction.
The Labour Court in Van Wyk v Albany Bakeries Ltd [2003] 12 BLLR 1274 (LC) held that an employer’s repudiation of a contract of employment could amount to a constructive dismissal.

[20]    The Labour Appeal Court in Pretoria Society for the Care of the Retarded v Loots (1997) 18 ILJ 981 (LAC) [also reported at [1997] 6 BLLR 721 (LAC) – Ed] held that it was not necessary to show that the employer intended any repudiation of the contract. The Court at 984 endorsed the following approach of the Employment Appeal Tribunal in Woods v WM Car Services (Peterborough) (1981) IRLR 347 at 350:

‘‘[I]t is clearly established that there is implied in a contract of employment a term that employers will not, without reasonable and proper cause, conduct themselves in a manner calculated or likely to destroy or seriously damage the relationship of confidence and trust between employer and employee: Courtaulds Northern Textiles Ltd v Andrew [1979] IRLR 84. To constitute a breach of this implied term, it is not necessary to show that the employer intended any repudiation of the contract: the Tribunal’s function is to look at the employer’s conduct as a whole and determine whether it is such that its effect, judged reasonably and sensibly, is such that the employee cannot be expected to put up with it: . . . the conduct of the parties has to be looked at as a whole and its cumulative impact assessed.”


  The Court at 984 added:

“Perhaps the best example of a constructive dismissal is the repudiation of the contract of employment by the employer who compels the employee to resign.”


The respondent’s repudiation of the applicants’ contracts of employment resulted in their “constructive” dismissal. The Labour Appeal Court in  
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1166
  WL Ochse Webb & Pretorius (Pty) Ltd v Vermeulen (1997) 18 ILJ 361 (LAC) at 367 [also reported at [1997] 2 BLLR 124 (LAC) – Ed] held that the employer’s repudiation of the common-law contract of employment had caused the employee’s dismissal, that the dismissal had, in the practical sense, been at the behest of his employer and that it thus qualified as a “constructive dismissal”.
The current dispute is about the unilateral amendment of the applicants’ conditions of employment and their resulting constructive dismissal. It is not an economic or mutual interest dispute.

The respondent’s submissions
The following is a verbatim extract from Mr C Beckenstrater’s heads of argument: 

“B Consideration of Primary Issue

5. As set out above, the resolution of the Applicants’ dispute would require the CCMA to determine if the Respondent’s amendment to the Commission Structure was intolerable conduct and unfair. The amendment to the Commission Structure is the Respondent’s reduction thereof. Accordingly, the CCMA is being called upon to determine whether the Respondent’s reduction of the Applicants’ remuneration6 was unfair and intolerable. 

(FN 6: Commission is part of an employee’s remuneration: Schoeman & Another v Samsung Electronics SA (Pty) Limited.)

6. In the absence of a binding contractual provision, the alteration to remuneration is a dispute of interest. Employees cannot insist upon an increased remuneration unless they have secured agreement to such increase through industrial action or negotiation. Similarly, employers cannot alter the terms and conditions of employment or reduce remuneration without the agreement of the employees. In casu, however, the employer has already obtained a right to amend the Commission Structure – in paragraph 3 of the Commission Structure. This express term constitutes the agreement between the parties. There is nothing objectionable to this provision. “A stipulation conferring upon a contractual party the right to determine a prestation is unobjectionable”. (NBS Boland Bank Limited v One Berg River Drive CC and Other Cases 1999 (4) SA 928 (SCA).
7. Thus the increase or reduction of remuneration is governed by the contractual provisions between the parties and, failing that, the economic power-play. This is a classic dispute of interest – a claim for the creation of new rights (in this instance the Respondent’s right to pay less to the Applicants for the securing of certain contracts).
8. In commenting on the amendments to the Labour Relations Act 28 of 1956 during the 1980s, John Grogan, Collective Labour Law, First Edition, p 5–6, notes the following:

‘Out of the cloudy pages of the law reports emerged a distinction not expressly dealt with in the newly named Labour Relations Act 28 of 1956. This was between ‘arbitrable’ or ‘justiciable’ disputes – soon to be labelled ‘disputes of right’ – on the one hand, and ‘disputes of interest’, on the other hand. Disputes of right were those in which parties claimed enforcements of rights flowing from contract, collective agreement or statute. Disputes of interest involved 

claims for benefits to which the parties could not claim a legal right, but which they nevertheless wish to established as legal rights. The nucleus of collective bargaining law formed around the distinction: collective bargaining and its extension, industrial action, was the recognised means of acquiring new rights; all others could be enforced through arbitration or adjudication. As we shall see, the distinction between disputes of right and disputes of interest still forms the critical bedrock of the current legislation’.

9. Grogan further notes the distinction, in principle, between the 1956 Labour Relations Act and the LRA in the following manner:

‘Noteworthy for its absence [in the LRA] is any provision imposing a duty to bargain. Like the outcome of collective bargaining, therefore, a right to bargain must initially be acquired by negotiation . . .’ (p13)

‘The Supreme Court of Appeal’s judgment in [SANDU v Minister of Defence and others (2006) 27 ILJ 2276 (SCA)] makes it clear that South African law does recognise a legally enforceable duty to bargain . . . The LRA does this by conferring on unions specific organisational rights . . . The Act also sets out a procedure in terms of which unions can compel employers to conclude recognition agreements. But that is as far as the LRA goes: statutory organisational rights merely assist unions to establish a presence in the workplace; they do not in themselves compel or pre-suppose, that employers must negotiate with unions over matters of mutual interest that right – the right to engage in collective bargaining – must be acquired by agreement or by trial of economic strength . . . The Supreme Court of Appeal judgment also eliminates the possibility that unions may by-pass the LRA and the Labour Court to secure a right to bargain by relying directly on the Constitution . . . It certainly puts an end to any argument that a duty to bargain, or to bargain in good faith, can be derived from the LRA’. (P112 – Although this Judgment has been criticised (but never overruled), those criticisms are not of this passage which remains good law.)

10. This distinction between disputes of right and disputes of interest is a bedrock to the LRA because agreement between the parties, reached consequent to negotiations and, if necessary, strikes and lock-outs is the primary way by which desires or interests are converted into rights. These policy considerations have received judicial approval in the realm of unfair labour practices. In HOSPERSA and another v Northern Cape Provincial Administration (2000) 21 ILJ 1066 (LAC) at [10]–[11] the following was said: 

‘A dispute of interest should be dealt with in terms of the collective bargaining structures and is therefore not arbitrable. A dispute of interest should not be allowed to be arbitrated [as an unfair labour practise] under the pretext that it is a dispute of right. To do so would possibly result in each individual employee theoretically cloaking himself or herself with the precisely the same description of the dispute that is the true subject matter of collective bargaining. And if such an employee could legitimately insist on his or her particular case being separately adjudicated, whether through arbitration or otherwise, the result would inevitably be a fundamental subversion of the collective bargaining process itself . . . If individuals can properly secure orders that have the effect of determining 

the valuation of differing interests on the merits thereof, then the distinction between disputes of interest and disputes of right would be distorted and the collective bargaining process self-evidently would become undermined. The following extract as well as the definition not only explain the meaning of a dispute of interest and dispute of right, but also highlights the correct procedure to be followed in their resolution.

‘Broadly speaking, disputes of right concerning infringement, application or interpretation of existing rights embodied in a contact of employment, collective agreement or statute, while disputes of interest (or ‘economic disputes’) concern the creation of fresh rights, such as higher wages, modification of existing collective agreements, etc. Collective bargaining, mediation and, as a last resort, peaceful industrial action, are generally regarded as the most appropriate avenues for the settlement of conflicts of interest, while adjudication is normally regarded as an appropriate method of resolving disputes of right’. Rycroft & Jordaan, A Guide to SA Labour Law (Juta 1992) at 169’. 

11. Furthermore, in considering changes to terms and conditions of employment SAPU & another v National Commissioner of the South African Police Service & Another [2006] 1 BLLR 42 (LC) records the following:
Before the 1995 legislation there was room for bargains to be struck and rights to be conferred though the adjudication of unfair labour practices which were defined broadly to embrace “any act or omission which in an unfair manner infringes or impairs the labour relations between an employer and employee”. Unfair unilateral variations of the terms and conditions of contracts of employment, given their potential to impact negatively upon labour relations, could therefore have been stigmatised as an unfair labour practice, depending also on the circumstances. The 1995 legislation, particularly in its amended form after 2002, dramatically reduced the scope of the unfair labour practice jurisdiction by codifying the concept in section 186(2) of the LRA, restricting its application to unfair conduct related to the provision of benefits, promotion, demotion, probation, training, suspension, disciplinary action short of dismissal, contractual rights to re-engagement and the detrimental treatment of whistle-blowers. Consequently, the current LRA offers no specific protection against unilateral variations of terms and conditions of employment under the unfair labour practice jurisdiction.
[78] The outcome of the legislative change is that protection against unilateral variation must be found either in the common law or in the Constitution. There is also a measure of procedural protection afforded by section 64(4) of the LRA, to which I will return presently.’
12. Bearing in mind the differences between the Labour Relations Act of 1956 and the current LRA, decisions made under the old Labour Relations Act of 1956 cannot be relied upon – particularly in determining the jurisdiction of the CCMA (a body which did not exist under the 1956 Act). It is for this reason that, for example, the decisions of W L Ochse Webb & Pretorius (Pty) Limited v Vermeulen (1997) 18 ILJ 361 

(LAC) and Van der Riet v Leisurenet Limited [1998] 5 BLLR 471 (LAC) do not assist in the determination of the present issue.

13. In the context of retrenchments the case of Schoeman & Another v Samsung Electronics (Pty) Limited (1999) 20 ILJ 200 (LC) is instructive. It must be noted that in that case the employer was not “empowered by contract unilaterally to change or amend the remuneration Structure payable to the Applicants” – at [21]. The Court still, however, observed the following:

‘The Applicants tried, as they were entitled to do, to negotiate a wage on a different basis to that which had prevailed in the past ... They thought, incorrectly, in my view, that the law would intervene in the bargaining relationship and come down on their side. They are mistaken. The law abstains from interfering in an individual or a collective bargaining situation. Market forces and other tactics dictate the outcome . . .

[The Applicants] laboured under the impression that they were entitled to a fair wage which was in excess of what was being offered and consequently and consistently rejected Samsung’s offer. The law does not know of the concept of a fair wage which is something other than a statutory minimum wage’. (At [22] and [32])

14.  On the same theme it must be recalled that even the Labour Court will not attempt to determine whether strike demands (made in support of disputes of interest) are reasonable or rational13. The rationale for this unwillingness of the Labour Courts to intervene in the demands in a strike is the same as that set out above.

FN 13: TSI Holdings (Pty) Limited & Others v NUMSA (2004) 25 ILJ 1080 (LC) at [5.11]. Greater Johannesburg Metropolitan Council v IMATU & Others [2001] 9 BLLR (LC).

15. If the Applicants are entitled to proceed in this matter, then any employee facing a lock-out by the employer in support of a demand that commissions be reduced, could resign and claim a constructive dismissal, calling upon the CCMA to determine whether the employer’s lock-out demand was unfair. This flies in the face of the aforementioned principle.
16. Accordingly, because the determination of this matter requires the CCMA to determine the substantive fairness of the employer’s exercise of its right to reduce commissions, the CCMA cannot entertain the matter.
Consideration of Procedural Issues
17. The second leg to the Applicants’ referral is a contention that there was insufficient consultation. Whether this argument is legally tenable depends on whether the Respondent had a duty to consult. The Commission Structure incorporates no requirement to consult as a contractual term between the parties. The individual contracts of employment do also not incorporate such a requirement.
18. The Respondent contends that, outside of contractual provisions, there is no duty on a employer to consult when exercising the contractual right it has to amend terms of employment. Simply put, neither the LRA nor any other piece of legislation provides for this. This has been dealt with in paragraphs 9 and 11 above.
19. It is consequent upon the above issues that it has been held there is a duty to consult whenever retrenchment is contemplated because this duty arises expressly out of Section 189 of the Act. Because of the absence of such express duty it has been held that there is no duty on an employer to consult when, for example, contemplating the transfer of its employees to another employer as a going concern (SACCAWU v Western Province Sports Club (2008) 29 ILJ 3038 (LC). It was such consideration that led the Court, in Forecourt Express (Pty) Limited v SATAWU & Others [2007] 2 BLLR 101 (LAC) at [39] to hold:

‘I have in effect said above that the Appellant [company] was entitled to chose the manner in which it would run its business provided that it did not change the terms and conditions of employment of the employees without their consent, and provided that, if it contemplated the dismissal of the employees, it complied with its obligations provided in Section 189 of the Act’. (Emphasis added).

20. The Respondent contends the legal position is thus the following – if an employer contemplates retrenching employees it must consult in terms of Section 189 of the LRA. This does not arise in the present matter. If an employer wishes to unilaterally change the terms and conditions of employment in breach of contract it cannot do so without consultation – because it requires employee consent. In this matter, however, the employees’ consent to the amendment already exists.”

Analysis and findings

The duty to determine the true nature of the dispute
Section 191(5) of the Act does create the impression that arbitration and adjudication is “employee driven” and that the employee is free to choose the forum in which the dispute is resolved by the manner in which he or she designates the dispute. This was, for instance, the import of the Labour Court’s judgments in Dempster v Kahn NO and others (1998) 19 ILJ 1475 (LC) [also reported at [1998] JOL 2438 (LC) – Ed], National Education Health & Allied Workers’ Union v Pressing Metal Industries (1998) 19 ILJ 1477 (LC) [also reported at[1998] 10 BLLR 1035 (LC) – Ed] and Van Heerden v Spes Bona Financial Administrators (Pty) Ltd (1999) 20 ILJ 2127 (LC). A different view was, however, expressed in Walters and others v Goldfields Ltd (Libanon Mine) and another (2001) 22 ILJ 1208 (LC) [also reported at [2001] 7 BLLR 847 (LC) – Ed] and two differing schools of thought eventually developed.
The Labour Appeal Court brought an end to the debate in Wardlaw v Supreme Mouldings (Pty) Ltd (2007) 28 ILJ 1042 (LAC) [also reported at [2007] 6 BLLR 487 (LAC) – Ed]. The Court, at 1051, rejected the formalistic school of thought in terms of which the forum is determined by the reason for dismissal alleged by the employee (ie “employee driven”) and in terms of which the Labour Court has jurisdiction up to finality even if it should later find that the reason for dismissal alleged by the employee is not the true reason. The Labour Appeal Court, instead, chose substance over form, preferring the substantive school of thought in terms of which the Labour Court has jurisdiction only provisionally until it makes a finding as to what the true reason for the dismissal is. This meant that the  
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1171
  Labour Court had to look at substance with regard to the reason for dismissal in determining whether a dispute should finally go to arbitration or adjudication and not simply at the employee’s mere allegation as to the reason for dismissal.
The principles laid down in the Wardlaw case (supra) were applied in Chizunza v MTN (Pty) Ltd and others (2008) 29 ILJ 2919 (LC) [also reported at [2008] 10 BLLR 940 (LC) – Ed]. The conciliating Commissioner in that case accepted the applicant’s word and issued a certificate of outcome in terms of which the applicant had been dismissed due to “alleged unfair discrimination – related to unfair discrimination”. The matter was then referred to the Labour Court, but the employer objected to the Court’s jurisdiction, claiming that the applicant had been dismissed for misconduct. The applicant, presumably relying on Fidelity Guards Holdings (Pty) Ltd v Epstein NO and others (2000) 21 ILJ 2382 (LAC) at 2387 [also reported at [2000] 12 BLLR 1389 (LAC) (Ed], argued that the certificate of outcome stood until it was reviewed. He also argued that the Court was not bound by the decision of the Labour Appeal Court in the Wardlaw case. Basson J rejected the applicant’s arguments and, at 2927 (paragraph 13), held that the Labour Court had to determine the true nature of the dispute “irrespective of its characterization by the referring party or by a CCMA Commissioner”. 
The Wardlaw case was revisited in Communication Workers Union obo MK Chabangu and others v CCMA, Eric Louw & SA Post Office Ltd (unreported, case number JR1354-03). The arbitrating Commissioner in that case issued a ruling in terms of which the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate an unfair dismissal dispute because the applicants had been dismissed for participating in unprotected industrial action “rather than mere misconduct in the strict sense of the word”. The applicants sought to have the said ruling reviewed and set aside. The Labour Court extended the principles laid down in the Wardlaw case to arbitrating Commissioners and, in paragraph 15, held that a Commissioner was enjoined to determine the “real” or “true” nature of a dispute that was referred to the CCMA irrespective of the characterisation of the dispute in the referral form. The Court pointed out that a CCMA Commissioner might well have “to hear sufficient evidence in order to identify the true reason for the dismissal if it is not possible to determine this question in the light of, for example, documentation or even the opening statements of the respective parties”. And in paragraph 16 of the judgment the Court once again emphasised that it was “the duty of the Commissioner to determine the true nature of the dispute, not the parties”. 

The true nature of the dispute
It is necessary to point out that the applicants had not requested the Commission to arbitrate in this dispute because they did not know the reason for their dismissal or because the dispute concerned an unfair labour practice. Sections 191(5)(a)(iii) and (iv) of the Act are consequently not applicable and Mr Van der Merwe’s submissions in this regard are without any substance. 
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1172
The dispute before me is a so-called constructive dismissal dispute – i.e. a dispute as contemplated in sections 186(1)(e) and 191(5)(a)(ii) of the Act. The applicants’ contention that they did not know why the respondent had amended their commission structure does not imply that they did not know the reason for their dismissal.
Mr Van der Merwe conceded that the respondent had been entitled to amend (and even reduce) the commission payable to the applicants from time to time, but submitted that the amendments of July 2011 were not acceptable. He contended that the unilateral amendment of the commission structure had on that occasion constituted an unfair labour practice as well as a repudiation of the applicants’ contracts of employment. 
The fact that the respondent’s right to amend (and reduce) the applicants’ commission had not been curbed by any contractual provisions makes it difficult to follow Mr Van der Merwe’s argument, but it is not necessary for the purpose hereof to decide whether the alleged unilateral amendment of the applicants’ conditions of service had, in fact, constituted a repudiation of their contracts of employment.
I accept that an unfair labour practice or a repudiation of an employee’s contract of employment might render an employee’s continued employment intolerable and that it could result in a constructive dismissal.
The repudiation of an employee’s contract of employment does not, however, give the employee a right to without further ado claim that he has been constructively dismissed. Mr Van der Merwe placed much emphasis on the Labour Court’s judgment in Van Wyk v Albany Bakeries Ltd [2003] 12 BLLR 1274 (LC), but he lost sight of the fact that it had been overturned by the Labour Appeal Court in Albany Bakeries Ltd v Van Wyk and others (2005) 26 ILJ 2142 (LAC) [also reported at [2011] JOL 27545 (LAC) – Ed]. The Labour Appeal Court held that an employer’s repudiation of a contract of employment did not per se entitle the employee to claim that he had been constructively dismissed. The Court at 2148–2149 stated:
“[23] Since the advent of the Act the prime and only consideration is whether the employer made continued employment intolerable for the employee.
[24] If the demotion is a repudiation which would entitle the employee to cancel the contract, but does not amount to making life intolerable, it is insufficient; if it is sufficient to make life intolerable, it is relevant.”
It is also necessary to point out that the Labour Appeal Court had considered an appeal in terms of the 1956 Act in WL Ochse Webb & Pretorius (Pty) Ltd v Vermeulen (1997) 18 ILJ 361 (LAC) [also reported at [1997] 2 BLLR 124 (LAC) – Ed]. The Court held that a (constructive) dismissal following a refusal by an employee to accept changed conditions of employment might nevertheless be fair if the employer showed there was a commercial rationale for the change and that the employee had been properly consulted about the change.
An employer’s failure to consult its employees about an amendment of their conditions of employment does not, however, constitute an unfair labour practice in terms of the provisions of the Labour Relations Act,  
[2012] 11 BALR 1161 (CCMA) at 1173
  1995. The definition of the unfair labour practice (in section 186(2) of the Act) also does not leave any room for Mr Van der Merwe’s contention that a repudiation of the employees’ contracts of employment constituted an unfair labour practice.
The Labour Court in SAPU and another v National Commissioner of the South African Police Service and another [2006] 1 BLLR 42 (LC); (2005) 26 ILJ 2403 (LC) at (paragraph 77) endorsed the fact that “the current LRA offers no specific protection against unilateral variations of terms and conditions of employment under the unfair labour practice jurisdiction”. The Court (at paragraph 78) added that protection against unilateral variation must be found either in the common law or in the Constitution. 

  The Court also referred to a measure of procedural protection afforded by section 64(4) of the Act and (at paragraph 81) stated:

“The sole reference to unilateral variation in the LRA, as indicated earlier, is found in s 64(4), which provides an important clue that the constitutional and legislative scheme treats contractual variations as subjects for collective bargaining. The section permits employees or trade unions who refer disputes over unilateral amendments to a bargaining council or the CCMA to require the employer not to implement or to reverse the unilateral variation for the duration of the period mandated by s 64(1)(a) of the LRA for the purposes of conciliation. If the employee refuses to comply, or the conciliation period lapses, the employer may resort without further ado to industrial action as the means of resisting the unilateral change.” (Own emphasis in bold.)


The applicants in casu (with the exception of Ms Perring) did, in fact, also refer a dispute about a unilateral change to their terms and conditions of employment to the Commission in terms of section 64(4) of the Act, but the Commission could not arbitrate in that dispute. 
The applicants could also have referred a mutual interest dispute to the Commission in terms of the provisions of section 134 of the Act and it might have been possible to resolve such a dispute through conciliation, but the Commission would not have been able to arbitrate in the dispute. They, in any event, chose not to follow that route.
The Labour Court’s judgment in Schoeman and another v Samsung Electronics (Pty) Ltd (1999) 20 ILJ 200 (LC) [also reported at [1998] JOL 3656 (LC) – Ed] is instructive. Samsung (unlike the respondent in casu) was not empowered by contract unilaterally to change or amend the remuneration package payable to the employees. Landman J (at 207–208) stated:
“[21] Samsung formed the view that the remuneration of the applicants was higher than they were prepared to pay. It was out of kilter with the market place. The applicants had been warned in 1996 that they were living off the high hog; they were in a windfall period; they were warned not to become accustomed to inflated earnings. On 5 February 1997 the revised package was offered. There is no evidence that Samsung, save an allegation in a letter which was not persisted with, was empowered by contract unilaterally to change or amend the remuneration package payable to the applicants. Cf Re Richmond Gates Property Co Ltd [1964] 

3 All ER 936 (ChD). Samsung needed the applicants to consent to their offer of a revised package. The individual applicants were entitled to accept or reject the offer. They rejected it and continued to do so until their services were terminated on 21 July 1997.

[22] The applicants tried, as they were entitled to do, to negotiate a wage on a different basis to that which had prevailed in the past, namely a wage equivalent to actual earnings for the past year as opposed to targeted earnings for the past year. They thought, incorrectly, in my view, that the law would intervene in the bargaining relationship and come down on their side. They are mistaken. The law abstains from interfering in an individual or a collective bargaining situation. Market forces and other tactics dictate the outcome.” (My emphasis in bold.) 
An employee or an entire workforce whose wages are not increased regularly and who ultimately find it impossible to make ends meet may well be able to claim that their employer makes their continuous employment intolerable. A deadlock in wage negotiations or wage cuts could result in similar claims and allowing the employees concerned to resign or walk away and claim that they have been constructively dismissed would indeed create an untenable precedent.
The position of the applicants is, in principle, no different. Their dispute about their reduced commission (ie remuneration) is in essence an economic or mutual interest dispute. Mogoeng AJA, as he then was, in HOSPERSA and another v Northern Cape Provincial Administration (2000) 21 ILJ 1066 (LAC) at 1070 (paragraph 10) [also reported at [2000] JOL 6301 (LAC) – Ed] explicitly stated that a dispute of interest should not be allowed to be arbitrated under the pretext that it is a dispute of right.
The Commission lacks jurisdiction to arbitrate in a mutual interest dispute and the applicants cannot circumvent the limitations and underlying philosophy of the Act by claiming that they have been constructively dismissed.

Ruling
The current dispute is in essence a mutual interest dispute. 
The Commission lacks jurisdiction to arbitrate in this dispute.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document