



Molefe and another / Telkom SA Ltd and another [2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission For Conciliation, Mediation And Arbitration
Case No: GATW14736-11
Date: 17/11/2015
Before: L Nowosenetz, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practices — Promotion — Employer unfairly favouring candidate for senior position — Unsuccessful candidates awarded compensation.

Editor’s Summary


The two applicants applied unsuccessfully for the post of Executive: Enterprise Risk Management, to which the second respondent, Mr S, was appointed. S had previously worked for the respondent but had left to join another company, KPMG, and had applied as an outside candidate with the consent of a senior manager. The applicants lodged a grievance, which was not resolved, and then referred a dispute to the CCMA as an alleged unfair labour practice and a dispute concerned alleged unfair discrimination. A Commissioner ruled that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to entertain the dispute, but that ruling was set aside on review and remitted to the commission to deal with as an alleged unfair labour practice relating to promotion. The applicants contended, inter alia, that the qualifications had been lowered to favour S, and that he lacked the experience required for the job. The respondent claimed that it had appointed the best candidate, which it was entitled to do.

The Commissioner noted that the CCMA should be slow to interfere with an employer’s decision on whom to promote, unless the process was irregular or the decision was not made in good faith. Some indications that the respondent was biased towards S – such as the decision to advertise the post externally and a change in the composition in the selection panel – were insufficient to indicate favouritism. However, the manager who had backed S was aware that S had joined KPMG without obtaining prior consent, which was required. This had placed S in a position of conflict of interest, which he should have declared. Also, S had been permitted to submit his CV late, and the respondent’s HR division had not been fully informed of the circumstances in which this indulgence had been granted. Furthermore, the CV had been submitted directly to the responsible manager, which was contrary to the requirements of the selection procedure. Since none of the other panellists had testified, nothing was known about their attitude to these irregularities, if indeed they were aware of them. The overall impression was that the responsible manager had bent over backwards to ensure that S was appointed. This tainted the selection process with illegality and unfairness.

 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 345

Turning to relief, the Commissioner held that there was no basis for placing either of the applicants in the position. Neither had sought protected promotion. However, they had both been unfairly deprived of the opportunity to compete in a fair selection process. This could only be redressed by an award of compensation.

The appointment of S was set aside and the respondent was directed to begin the selection process afresh, and each applicant was awarded compensation equal to six months’ salary. The respondent was also ordered to pay part of the second applicant’s costs.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
This was an arbitration held at the offices of the CCMA in Pretoria on 16 and 17 April 2012; 2 September, 28, 29 and 30 October 2015. The first applicant (“Mr Molefe”) was self represented, the second applicant (“Mr Maphanga”) by Adv P Kirstein and both the first respondent (“Telkom”) and the second respondent (“Mr Strachan”) were represented by Adv T Manchu. Bundles of documents marked “A”, “B” and “C” were handed in. The proceedings were digitally recorded. The parties entered into an agreement to file written closing submissions by 6 November 2015.

Background
The applicants both employees of Telkom applied unsuccessfully for the position of Executive: Enterprise Risk Management (“the Position”). Mr Strachan was appointed to the Position in March 2011. Internal grievance procedures were pursued by the applicants which were finalised on 1 November 2011. They were dissatisfied with the outcome and referred this dispute to the CCMA for conciliation on 30 November 2011. The referral was based on an unfair labour practice as well as on section 10 of the Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 (“the EEA”). A certificate of non-resolution was issued on 19 December 2011 only in respect of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the LRA”).

In limine
The second respondent was joined in terms of a joinder ruling by Commissioner L Dekker dated 30 January 2012. A ruling dated 27 February 2012 by Commissioner E van Kerken was made directing the first respondent to deliver certain documents to the applicants and for a pre-arbitration meeting to be held.
A ruling was made by me dated 17 April 2012 on a point in limine by the respondents that the CCMA does not have jurisdiction in terms of section 10 of the EEA in this dispute. The ruling was that the dispute was an unfair labour practice dispute but discrimination issues may form part of the dispute. This ruling was reviewed and set aside by the Labour Court in a 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 346
  judgment dated 16 October 2014 that the CCMA had no jurisdiction to arbitrate any claim based under the EEA. (This case was referred to the CCMA prior to the amendments to section 10 brought by Act 47 of 2013). The case was remitted for arbitration.

Issue to be decided
This is an unfair labour practice dispute based on section 186(2)(a) of the LRA relating to promotion. Both applicants contend that the second respondent was unfairly and unethically recruited and appointed into the Position. In their LRA 7.11 referral they contended that Telkom violated the Telkom Staffing Policy, the Telkom Business Code of Ethics, the Human Resource good practice in promoting suitable internal candidates of a designated group and the KPMG consultancy agreement. They both contend that they should have been selected. In the referral, they both claim protective promotion ie to be awarded the same salary and benefits attached to the Position but in their closing submissions they seek to be appointed into the Position currently held by Mr Strachan. The respondents deny these claims. I must decide whether there was an unfair labour practice and if so, determine an appropriate remedy.
The following material facts which are not in dispute can be stated briefly. In July 2010, Mr Mvelase filed a request for approval to create and fill the Position. It was graded M3. Both internal and external advertisement was requested. The experience required in the job description generated in July 2010 by Mr A Makhanya was 8 years relevant ERM experience of which 3 years should have been in a management capacity. An internal advertisement was duly published by Telkom in July 2010. Three candidates were shortlisted and subsequently interviewed on 26 August: 2010 Mr Molefe, Mr Maphanga and Mr Strachan. The interview was based on a case study on enterprise risk management which the candidates had to present answers. The score results were: Mr Maphanga – 39; Mr Strachan – 38.5; Mr Molefe – 30. The interviewing panel was comprised of Mr T Mvelase (hiring promoter), Mr M Dukander (Group Executive Internal Audit) and Mr M Naidoo (Senior Manager HR). The outcome was not made known to the applicants until 26 March 2012 pursuant to a ruling by Commissioner Van Kerken. Mr Mvelase did not make a selection from the internal candidates and caused an external advertisement to appear on 16 September 2010 with closing date on 30 September 2010.
Mr Strachan had meanwhile resigned from Telkom on 3 September 2010 and joined KPMG with effect from 1 October 2010. Telkom had entered into a Consultancy Agreement with KPMG signed on 25 August 2010 (the Agreement) to which Mr Strachan was privy and which he witnessed while he was still employed by Telkom. Clause 27 thereof headed “STAFF” reads as follows: “Both Parties agree not to make any offer of employment or to employ any member of the other Party’s employees during the duration of this agreement”. Mr Strachan approached Mr Mvelase after joining KPMG to enquire if he could submit his CV late as an external candidate. Telkom approved the late submission of his CV in December 2010. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 347
A second round of short listing took place and interviews were held in October 2010 and in February 2011. There were five additional candidates. The applicants were invited to the second round on 14 December 2010. There was one change in the panel: Mr Naidoo was replaced by Mr I Moola (Senior Manager HR). The score results of the parties in the second round were: Mr Strachan – 59.5, Mr Maphanga – 49.5; Mr Molefe – 39.5. The second highest score was an external candidate Mr L Govender – 54. Mr Strachan was appointed to the position. He left KPMG and commenced his duties in the Position from April 2011. It also bears mentioning that a whistle blowing dossier with varied allegations of corruption in Telkom including the appointment of Mr Strachan was referred to Ernst and Young (E & Y) for investigation. No report is available to this day but an affidavit dated 26 March 2012 by Mr JC van der Walt an E & Y investigator, was submitted containing material relating to the appointment of Mr Strachan.

Survey of evidence

Lengthy evidence was led which is not fully traversed below. Only the facts salient to deciding this award are presented.

The applicants’ case

Mr JZ Maphanga (second applicant) testified as follows:

He presently occupies the position of Senior Manager: Mergers and Acquisitions Division and has 10 years of senior managerial experience in various divisions of Telkom. He has 20 years service with Telkom. He has a BTech (Marketing) and MBA degree as well as business diplomas. He has completed a leadership development programme in Switzerland as well as the Executive Development Programme at Wits Business School. He is a member of the Telkom management pool. He was not only a suitable candidate, but the best candidate. He got the highest score in the internal interview. He was not advised of the outcomes of the internal interviews at the time.
He was a talent management candidate but this was ignored. It was not necessary to advertise the Position which was at M3 level. According to clause 2(1)(d) and (2)(h) of the Staffing Policy he could have been directly appointed by the hiring promoter (Mr Mvelase) in consultation with the Chief of HR. According to clause 2 b thereof preference should be given to employees from historically disadvantaged groups. According to Clause 2(c) the recruitment and selection process should be ethical. According to clause 2(v) all candidates should receive correspondence on the outcome within 45 days after the advertisement has closed. He heard nothing until he was recalled in December for a second interview. None of these requirements were complied with. He stated in detail that there was no compliance with the Employment Equity policy of Telkom. Africans are grossly under-represented in top management. The external candidates were interviewed from 19 November to 1 December 2010. He discovered that different questionnaires were used for the January 2011 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 348
  interview when he was interviewed. The scoring was inconsistent in that a total of 70 were used for some interviews and 80 for another.
The experience requirements were lowered in the external advertisement for the benefit of Mr Strachan. Normally there should be 3 to 5 years experience as a senior manager which he did not have. Mr Strachan was appointed although he did not comply with clause 2(l) which provides that an employee should spend at least 12 months in a position before moving to another level ie a promotion. He believed Mr Strachan withdrew from the internal job application after finding out that he did not get the top score. He believed the late acceptance of Mr Strachan’s external job application was irregular. Mr Strachan approached Mr Mvelase in November to submit his CV. There was breach of the Telkom Business Code of Ethics. There was a conflict of interest as Mr Strachan was part of the awarding to KPMG of the Agreement and then he joined KPMG. The clause restraining employment between Telkom and KPMG was breached. Only the Group CEO had authority to sign and amend the Agreement.
The questions in the second interview were based on a strategy document produced by Mr Strachan. He believed this gave Mr Strachan an undue advantage resulting in Mr Strachan achieving the highest score. On 25 March 2011, he received a regret notice that he had been unsuccessful. The Position is located in the Corporate Governance division which should set an exemplary tone in terms of integrity and compliance with good corporate governance.
It was put to him in cross-examination that if Mr Mvelase had favoured Mr Strachan he had authority to directly appoint him and bypass the advertising process. The witness was of the view that Mr Mvelase tried to create the impression that he was being transparent. His favouritism was shown by the lowering of the management experience criteria. It was put to him that there was nothing sinister about Mr Moola replacing Mr Naidoo in the second round of interviews as Mr Moola was not available in the first round. It was also put that there was nothing wrong with using the document for the second interviews which was created by Mr Strachan as it was available to all employees. It was put to him that the affidavit of Mr Van der Walt did not make any fining of impropriety in the appointment of Mr Strachan. The witness said the final report of E & Y had never been made available. It was put to him that late job applications may be made under the Staffing Policy. He responded that it was doubtful HR had been made aware of all the facts in approving the late application.

Mr TD Molefe (first applicant) testified as follows:

His qualifications were two Bachelor of Commerce degrees including Risk Management. He worked in an insurance company from 1996 until he joined Telkom in 2004. He was appointed as a Senior Manager in 2006. He was second in charge to Mr K Oliver the Executive for Corporate Risk Management, with the entire subordinate employees in that section reporting to him. He oversaw both risk management and insurance. In January 2009, Corporate Risk Management was moved to Telkom 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 349
  Assets and revenue Protection Services (“TARPS”) under the new Executive Manager Mr Mvelase after the retirement of Mr K Oliver. Mr Mvelase had no risk management experience and his was a developmental promotion.
Prior to this merger he was informed that Mr Strachan would be seconded to ERM on a temporary basis. Mr Strachan was at that time a manager/specialist (level 5) at SAOX a section of Telkom. Mr Strachan reported directly to Mr Mvelase rather than to the witness. Mr Strachan was given special treatment. He also was the liaison person with KPMG instead of the witness.
Later in 2009, Mr Mvelase split risk management into ERM and insurance sections. Mr Mvelase gave the witness the insurance section to manage and Mr Strachan was given ERM. In mid-2009 Mr Strachan was promoted to Senior Manager ERM. Mr Mvelase was biased towards developing Mr Strachan for ERM and not the witness.
The witness had the required qualifications and experience and should have been the preferred candidate. Mr Strachan did not have the relevant management experience. It is common practice at Telkom that to be promoted from a senior manager to executive one should have at least two years experience as a senior manager. Mr Strachan did not have this. He regarded the internal advertisements and interviews as a sham to pave the way for Mr Mvelase to appoint Mr Strachan. Mr Mvelase had never applied for any position at Telkom. He had simply been promoted. He wanted to appoint Mr Strachan as his preferred candidate in the same way. He contended that prior to appointing Mr Strachan he had already asked for a commitment from Mr Strachan to stay in the employ of Telkom for at least 3 years. The applicants were not asked this.
After resigning from Telkom, Mr Strachan joined KPMG in violation of the consultancy agreement. It also violated the Telkom policies. He should have been disqualified for this reason and disciplined. Mr Mvelase bent over backwards in favour of Mr Strachan by waiving clause 27 of the consultancy agreement with KPMG. He believes Telkom Legal Services never assented to the waiver. Mr Mvelase exercised undue influence and abuse of power in procuring management to allow the late submission of Mr Strachan’s application.

The respondent’s case

Mr T Mvelase testified as follows

He held the position of Group Executive: Enterprise Management. In July 2010, he completed an application to fill a new post. He intended from the outset to advertise internally and externally for the Position in order to cast the net as widely as possible. He did not have a candidate in mind. If he did he had the authority under the Staffing Policy to make a direct appointment at M3 level without advertising.
Mr Moola was unavailable at the time to serve on the interview panel in August 2010. He was the HR business partner who worked closely with 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 350
  and had a thorough knowledge of the staffing requirements of Mr Mvelase’s department. The interview was not the final process. The candidates still had to be psychologically assessed. He was not satisfied with the outcome of the internal interviews. The responses were too theoretical. He proceeded with the external advertisements in September 2010.
He received a letter of resignation from Mr Strachan dated 3 September 2010. He enquired why Mr Strachan was resigning and was advised that Mr Strachan had received an offer from KPMG. They agreed to part ways. In November 2010, Mr Strachan phoned him and asked him if it was possible to put in a late application as an external candidate for the Position. He did not make this decision. He referred it to HR in a letter dated 23 December 2010 requesting the late acceptance of Mr Strachan’s CV. It was approved. He discussed the issue about Mr Strachan with the senior partner of KPMG and there was a verbal agreement to waive clause 27 of the Agreement. The Chief of HR hardly if ever was on interviewing panels. Mr Naidoo and Mr Moola had delegated powers to be on the panel.
He did not know where the E & Y report was. It was commissioned by the Board Audit Committee. He has never seen it. He regarded it as still being investigated.
Under cross-examination, he did not agree that Mr Strachan received special treatment. He disagreed that he lowered the standard of management experience. There was no restraint agreement with Mr Strachan. He admitted that the waiver with KPMG was not formalised with Legal Services. There was nothing untoward. He was asked why Mr Strachan was accommodated again as candidate having withdrawn his candidacy and resigned. He said that in the second application Mr Strachan was an external candidate. It was put to him that if he disclosed to HR that Mr Strachan was appointed contrary to the Agreement, the outcome of the late submission may have been different. He answered that HR was aware Mr Strachan had resigned. He disagreed that the case study being based on the document prepared by Mr Strachan gave him an undue advantage. All the candidates had access to it. He considered Mr Molefe to be an insurance specialist and not suitable for the role of ERM.

Mr A Makhanya testified as follows

He was in the HR Department of Telkom. He was involved in the short listing and advising management in the selection of candidates. He drew up the job description for the Position. The requirements were not lowered but to widen the pool of possible candidates. There is discretion whether to require managerial or senior managerial experience. Mr Moola was unavailable for the August interviews and resumed his place on the panel for the second round of interviews. The case studies used for the interviews were checked by HR for bias and he was not aware of anything untoward in the scoring. He denied two different questionnaires were used in the second round. He explained that the HR Chief rarely sat as a panellist in interviews and delegated this function. Mr Moola was Head of 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 351
  HR Corporate and was familiar with the nature of the Position. He conceded that staffing policy was not fully adhered to regarding time limits for finalisation of the selection and notifications to the candidates.

Mr G Strachan (second respondent) testified as follows:

He is presently the incumbent in the Position at the respondent since April 2011. He has a CA. He was employed at KPMG as a manager for 18 months. He joined Telkom in 2006. He was a senior manager in risk management for 12 months. He prepared the Telkom document Enterprise Risk Management Strategy and Plan 2010/2011 dated 31 March 2010. It was not secret and was accessible. The principles were in the public domain.
Around July 2010, Telkom was restructuring and he decided to leave. He had been with Telkom for 5 years and was not sure he wanted to remain there. He engaged with KPMG. He was made an offer after the internal interviews. He was not aware of the interview scores at the time. He withdrew his candidacy and resigned. He joined KPMG but his role did not turn out as he expected. Early in November 2010, he approached Mr Mvelase whether he could submit a late external job application. Mr Mvelase undertook to discuss it with HR and revert. He was permitted to submit his CV and did so. He was interviewed in January 2011. He did not receive any special treatment. He did not resign to exert pressure to be appointed. He did not discuss Clause 27 of the Agreement with KPMG prior to his employment there. There was an agreement to waive this provision and no breach took place. It was put to him in cross examination that his appointment was a rigged process. He denied this. He admitted he was privy to the negotiations leading to the Agreement although he did not negotiate it. He also signed it as a witness.

Analysis of evidence and argument

First applicant’s submissions
There were violations of the Staffing Policy by Mr Mvelase and Mr Makhanya in respect of clauses 2(h), 2(q) clause 2(u), 2(v) and clause 2.1(i). Further, that there was improper governance regarding clause 27 of the Agreement. He submitted Telkom Legal Services never approved the alleged waiver of clause 27. The inference was sought that Mr Mvelase went the extra length to accommodate Mr Strachan despite him not being the ideal person for the post. On the other hand, Mr Molefe had all the suitable qualifications, skills and experience for the Position. He prayed that he be appointed to the Position and that he be awarded compensation for the unfair labour practice.

Second applicant’s submissions
There were breaches of Telkom’s Staffing Policy, Telkom’s Business Code of Ethics, HR good practice regarding promoting designated groups and the Consultancy Agreement. These clauses were many and are not repeated here. There was uncontested evidence that the long practice was 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 352
  that at least 3 years experience at a senior management level was required for executive positions. This was deviated from in the advertisements and job specification for the Position. The inference was sought that this was to accommodate Mr Strachan who only had one year of senior management in the light of the fact that no other internal candidates with less than 3 years senior management experience were short listed except for Mr Strachan. The second applicant was far more experienced and qualified. There was favouritism towards Mr Strachan in accepting the late submission of his CV three months after the closing date for external applications.
The Position was located in the Corporate Governance division which is expected to set a tone of exemplary leadership in terms of integrity, ethics and legal compliance. The appointment of Mr Strachan did not meet the required standards of transparency and corporate governance. The Agreement itself sets high standards of conduct. Clause 16.1 provides that Telkom may terminate the agreement if KPMG is found to have acted dishonestly, illegally, in bad faith or by making misrepresentations to Telkom. Clause 18 provides a warranty of ethical conduct by both parties. Clause 20.3 provides that no amendment to the Agreement shall be valid unless reduced to writing and signed by both parties. The joining of KPMG by Mr Strachan was a violation of clause 27 of the Agreement. It took place in full view of the Corporate Governance section of Telkom. The verbal waiver testified by Mr Mvelase contravened clause 20.3 of the Agreement. The waiver was not put the applicants in cross-examination. Certain allegations in the affidavit of Mr Van der Walt were cited in support of the submission that Mr Strachan gave conflicting reasons for his resignation.
There was a non-disclosure of the facts by Mr Mvelase in his request to HR for approval of the late submission of Mr Strachan’ s external application. These include, inter alia, that – Mr Strachan was an internal candidate who was ranked second; that Mr Strachan withdrew his internal candidacy; that Mr Maphanga was ranked first and was an Employment Equity and Talent Management Pool candidate; that Mr Strachan resigned from Telkom after learning the results resigned and joined KPMG in violation of the Agreement and the corporate governance implications. It is improbable that approval would have been given if proper disclosure was made. Mr Mvelase thus misled the HR department acted unethically and abused his authority.
The findings sought are that the internal interview results established the second applicant as the best candidate, the second round of interviews were flawed and the outcomes should be set aside. The convoluted procedure was sham to give the appearance of an open competition for the Position. The second applicant seeks appointment in the Position, alternatively protected promotion, further alternatively compensation. A costs order is sought against the first respondent for delays in the conduct of this case. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 353

Respondent’s submissions
The complaints regarding the Employment Equity Act should not be determined. The challenges of unfair conduct are based on speculation and not real evidence. The contention that Mr Strachan was the favoured candidate was based upon:
– alleged lowering of job requirements: Mr Makhanya dealt with this in his evidence. This was designed to invite a wider range of persons. Some managers are de facto senior managers. The job description would no have been approved by Telkom if it was improper. There is no evidence this was to assist Mr Strachan.
– the decision to have external interviews: This was decided from the outset in 2010 by Mr Mvelase and prior to the internal interviews.
– Mr Strachan left Telkom because he fared badly in the internal interview: There is no evidence that Mr Strachan knew the outcome of the internal interviews at the time that he resigned.
– the acceptance of the late application by Mr Strachan as an external candidate.
– different questionnaires and scoring used for the interviews. All candidates were scored out of 80. There was no evidence of different questionnaires used alternatively that they were unfair. No evidence to show how the document prepared by Mr Strachan placed him at an advantage.
Mr Mvelase had authority under the Staff Code and could have appointed Mr Strachan directly without advertising but did not do so. This rebuts the inference of favouritism. The line manager (Mr Mvelase) has the final say and discretion in making the appointment. He could still appoint Mr Strachan in the external interviews even if Mr Strachan’s score was not the highest. Mr Strachan was already the Senior Manager for Enterprise Risk. Unless the appointing authority was shown not to have applied its mind in the selection of the successful candidate the CCMA may not interfere with the prerogative of the employer to appoint whom it considers the best candidate. This is justified only where its conduct is so grossly unreasonable as to warrant an inference that it failed to apply its mind. Van Rensburg v Northern Cape Administration (1997) 18 ILJ 1421 (CCMA).
The Agreement is irrelevant to the unfair labour practice dispute relating to promotion. There was no restraint agreement to stop Mr Strachan going to work for KPMG. He had the necessary consent. There was no breach of the Agreement as both parties consented. The late application of Mr Strachan was approved by HR in accordance with the Staffing Policy. The criticism of the late application is based on unsubstantiated speculation by the applicants. There is no policy requiring the recording of approvals of late submissions.
The challenge to the authenticity of the second interviews is not supportable. The interviewing process was not complete in August 2010. Mr Strachan obtained the best scores in January 2011. The failure to have the Chief of HR on the panel and non-compliance with timelines did not 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 354
  affect the integrity of the selection process. POPCRU obo Kukkuk v SAPS [2001] 8 BALR 809 (P).
It was pointed out that Mr L Govender obtained the second highest score in the second round and he could have been appointed rather than the applicants if Mr Strachan had not been appointed. No prejudice had been shown. Protected promotion is not a competent remedy because it is only provided for in the Public Service Code as a procedure and Telkom is not a public entity. In KwaDukuza Municipality v SALGBC and others [2008] 11 BLLR 1057 (LC), the Labour Court set aside on review an award granting protected promotion on the basis that the arbitrator could not have known that the employee would in fact have been promoted to the position in question.

Legal considerations
As a starting point, in a dispute relating to unfair conduct about promotion the onus of proof is on the employee. The standard of proof is on a balance of probabilities. Section 186(2)(a) of the LRA (as amended by Act 12 of 2002) reads as follows:

“‘Unfair labour practice’ means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –

(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation, (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee”.
Cognisance is taken of the following authorities with regard to the approach to be adopted in such cases: SAMWU obo Damon / Cape Metropolitan Council [1999] 3 BALR 259 (CCMA) at page 262. In Arries v CCMA and others [2006] 11 BLLR 1062 (LC) at [22] it reads:

“This Court has been prepared to interfere with an employer’s decision in relation to a decision to promote a particular person on the basis that there was a ‘serious irregularity’ in an appointment process (see National Commissioner of the SA Police Service v Safety & Security Sectoral Bargaining Council and others (2005) 26 ILJ 903 (LC) at 908 paragraph [12]).”

As the authorities warn, intervention with a managerial decision under the unfair labour practice law relating to promotion should be cautiously ventured. The selection of the most suitable candidate is a process best undertaken by the employer who has a far better understanding of its needs and the qualities of the candidates, particularly existing employees. Yet the selection decision making process is an administrative function which is subject to legal scrutiny and must be imbued with objective criteria and rationality. Another necessary requirement for the fair evaluation of the candidate is transparency. Thus a candidate who can objectively satisfy all the criteria for the position may still face another hurdle in the form of negative perceptions or allegations about the candidate of which the employer is aware but which the candidate might not be and which may or may not be false or unfounded. Thus an employer should in the interview disclose such negative concerns and afford a candidate an opportunity to respond. This is nothing more than the broad doctrine of audi alteram partem which is a vital component of natural justice. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 355

Was the appointment unfair?
The applicant’s case for favouritism of Mr Strachan has many strands which indeed create a perception of a bias towards Mr Strachan but most of which have been satisfactorily answered by the respondent. Most but not all. Mr Mvelase could indeed have simply been appointed without advertising the Position. Instead, Mr Mvelase took the long route of internal and external advertisements. The applicants’ submission is that he went through the motions of affording an open competitive process to the candidates to conceal his pre-determined intention to appoint Mr Strachan. It is not necessary to answer this question in order to interrogate the fairness of his appointment. No finding can be made that he resigned because he was not successful in the internal interview. No reliance can be placed on the hearsay allegations in the affidavit of Mr Van der Walt.
Even though Mr Strachan by a very narrow margin achieved the second highest score in the internal advertisements, Mr Mvelase could have exercised his discretion at that stage and appointed him. He did not do this because he felt all the candidates were too theoretical. He obviously changed his mind about Mr Strachan based on the second round of interviews where Mr Strachan achieved the highest score. There are two differential factors in the external interviews. Firstly, Mr Naidoo was replaced by Mr Moola who was supposed to be on the panel in the first place and no negative inference can be drawn from this. Mr Naidoo had been the panellist that had awarded the second applicant the highest scores relative to other panellists. Secondly, the questionnaire was based on the strategy document prepared by Mr Strachan. This is not per se unusual as he was previously the Senior Manager for Enterprise Risk and this was within the scope of his tasks. The incumbent to the Position would indeed have to be familiar with this document in order to implement it and this cannot be regarded as unfair. If he enjoyed an advantage it was not an undue or unfair one. In these respects there is insufficient evidence of favouritism. Nor do the procedural flaws in finalising the process and notifying the unsuccessful candidates contribute to any sustainable inference of unfairness. Nor has the applicant proved that the lowering of requirements were irregular improper or unfair. It is accepted that this was within the discretion of management.
Where the process is seriously derailed is the issue of Mr Strachan’s resignation, recruitment by KPMG late submission as an external candidate and his re-employment by Telkom. This is submitted by the respondent to be irrelevant to his appointment. It cannot be so. The purview of this dispute necessarily requires scrutinising the rationality of the selection of Mr Strachan and the scope of enquiry of rationality is not simply limited to his score but to all the objective factors having a bearing on his suitability for appointment. Such factors legitimately include his business integrity and adherence to Telkom’s business ethics and legal compliance. In short the enquiry is whether the appointment of Mr Strachan complied with sound corporate governance. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 356
Mr Strachan admitted he did not obtain consent to join KPMG before accepting his appointment. Mr Mvelase explained that clause 27 was waived in a discussion between him and a senior partner of KPMG. No corroboration or confirmation of this alleged waiver was produced. In any event a verbal waiver is unlawful as any amendment of the Agreement must be written, according to clause 20.3 thereof. This omission is aggravated having regard to Mr Mvelase being an advocate. Even if he had delegated powers to contract, which was in dispute, he should have referred the waiver to Legal Services as he had an interest in it and to ensure transparency and good governance. The ethical problem faced by Mr Strachan was a potential conflict of interest and confidentiality. Clause 5.8 of the Business Code of Ethics creates a reporting duty by an employee to Legal Services in such circumstances. Mr Mvelase was aware that Mr Strachan was joining KPMG and had a similar ethical reporting duty.
The applicant’s submission is correct that the motivation by Mr Mvelase for the late filing of Mr Strachan’s CV omitted serious material facts (see paragraph 28). In my view, the full circumstances should have been placed before HR in detail for careful consideration. While it is indeed speculative to say what the decision of HR might have been, it would have gone a long way to allay the lack of transparency in the decision to allow the late submission of Mr Strachan’s CV. Nor did Mr Mvelase alert HR to the compliance issue with clause 27. He supported the application and abused his authority by misleading HR and avoiding checks and balances.
The point has been made by the applicants with justification that the job environment of the Position is within Corporate Governance and a person in this position in should have solid integrity. The circumstances place into serious doubt that this issue even entered the mind of Mr Mvelase, mired as he was complicit in the unethical and unlawful movement of Mr Strachan from Telkom to KPMG and then back to Telkom. Mr Mvelase’s objectivity about Mr Strachan as a suitable candidate is seriously lacking in this respect. These issues should have been dealt with at the short listing stage. None of the other panellists testified and their views on the suitability of Mr Strachan are only not known as far as the scoring is concerned. It is not known what their response would be and whether they were aware of the full facts. On the case presently before me I conclude that there was a serious irregularity in the appointment process of Mr Strachan based solely on the KPMG issue. The decision by Mr Mvelase appointing Mr Strachan was not rational in this respect only. The manner in which Mr Mvelase dealt with Mr Strachan and his change of mind about Mr Strachan’s suitability is truly astonishing and inconsistent. It supports the applicants’ contention of favouritism. In passing it is noted that Mr Strachan submitted his CV directly to Mr Mvelase which is contrary to the advertised procedure and the Staffing Policy. It should have gone straight to HR. Mr Mvelase certainly bent over backwards for Mr Strachan. However I refrain from speculating as to Mr Mvelase’s motives. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 357
In conclusion, the appointment of Mr Strachan was tainted with illegality, improper and unfair. His late application was not properly considered and if approved in view of the full facts he should have been screened at the short listing stage. That he survived these controls to reach the interview stage was an egregious irregularity. The appointment should be set aside. The perceptions of the applicants as to unfairness and favouritism other than in this respect are not sufficient to make any findings of an unfair promotion procedurally or substantively although it is accepted that there were procedural flaws. Had the issue of Mr Strachan’s move to KPMG been dealt with in a lawful, ethical and transparent way the outcome of this award would probably be different.

The remedy
There is no basis to intervene in substituting one of the applicants in the Position. Indeed, in the second round of interviews the external candidate Mr L Govender achieved the second highest score. I cannot make any findings as to whom the most suitable candidate should be. This should be determined by a new and transparent process by Telkom. Nothing prevents Mr Strachan from re-applying. The applicants have not made a case for protective promotion in view of the Kwa Dukuza case.
The applicants have nevertheless been prejudiced in that they were unfairly deprived of an opportunity to fairly compete for the Position by the improper selection of Mr Strachan. It is difficult to quantify equitable compensation which I determine to be the appropriate remedy. It is not linked to financial loss but is a composite amount to afford solace for rights infringement as well as to serve as a token of censure to the employer. In my view, compensation equivalent to six month remuneration is appropriate. I take into account as a mitigating factor that the opportunity to re-apply for the Position still exists as a future remedy for the applicants in view of this Award. I also take into account that neither applicant has not proven that he is the best candidate and should have been appointed.
The second applicant sought costs in view of the delay caused by the respondents. They were entitled to approach the Labour Court on review but in view of the measure of success of the applicants, the considerable legal expense incurred by the second applicant in exercising his rights and the unjust nature of the selection to the Position by the first respondent, partial costs are awarded against the first respondent under CCMA rule 39 (as amended w.e.f 1 April 2015)) for 2 September, 28, 29 and 30 October 2015 being four additional days at the rate of R4 000 per day.

Award
The first respondent, Telkom, committed an unfair labour practice against the first applicant, Mr TD Molefe and the second applicant, Mr JZ Maphanga by the promotion of the second respondent, Mr G Strachan to the position of Executive: Enterprise Risk Management and this was unfair conduct in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995. 
[2016] 4 BALR 344 (CCMA) at 358
The first respondent, Telkom, is directed to set aside the appointment of the second respondent Mr G Strachan with effect from 30 calendar days after receipt of this award and to reopen the procedures for filling the position of Executive: Enterprise Risk Management within 60 days from receipt of this award.
The first respondent, Telkom, is ordered to pay compensation to the first applicant, Mr TD Molefe in the sum of R64 284,27 x 6 = R385 705,62 (subject to any tax directive/statutory deductions) and to the second applicant, Mr JZ Maphanga in the sum of R76 869,75 x 6 = R461 218,50 (subject to any tax directive/statutory deductions) within 14 days of receipt of this award.
The first respondent, Telkom is ordered to pay the legal costs of the second applicant, Mr JZ Maphanga in the amount of R16 000 within 14 days of receipt of this award.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document