



Zibani v SAPS [2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban
Case No: PSSS 94-06 / 07 
Hearing Date(s): 28 / 11, 21 / 12 / 2006 
Judgment Date(s): 16 / 01 / 2007 
Bench: L Williams 


Keywords


Labour Law — Unfair labour practice — Application for promotion — Burden of proof — Relative strength of applicant — Insufficient proof of unfairness — Application dismissed — Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 — Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, sections 186 and 193 — Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, sections 186(2) and 193(4) — Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, section 186(2)(a)

Mini Summary


After twenty years of service in the police force, of which the last five had been as a captain, the applicant applied for a post as a superintendent. The Commissioner appointed another applicant from a communications background. The applicant contended that the Commissioner had not applied fair criteria in making the decision. She lodged a dispute concerning an unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995.

Held that the applicant bore the burden of proving that she had been overlooked for an unfair reason and that the respondent had failed to adhere to its promotion procedures and policies. It was not sufficient to show that she was the better candidate.

Held that there was no corroborating evidence to support her contention that the selection panel had failed to apply the criteria set out in the National Instruction 1/2004 for the SAPS. Since the post was not a "designated post" the Commissioner had not been obliged to apply employment equity. The procedure that the respondent had adopted in filling the post had been fair. The relative strengths and weaknesses of the candidates could not in themselves prove that the employer had committed an unfair labour practice. The application was dismissed.

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 1




Details of hearing and representation

The con-arb took place at the SAPS offices at Servamus Building in Durban on 28 November 2006 and 21 December 2006. The applicant was represented by Mr Khanyile from SAPU and the respondent was represented by Superintendent Buitendach. Joinder parties Heenen and Mzimela were present on both occasions and joinder party Khaba was present on 21 December 2006.

Issues to be decided

The applicant claimed that she ought to have been promoted to post 1457 and that the respondent acted unfairly by failing to promote her.

The issue to be decided was thus whether the respondent's conduct constituted an unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended ("the Act").

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 2

Preliminary issues

The respondent advised that it had no mandate to settle the matter and the certificate of outcome was duly issued on 28 November 2006. The matter was then adjourned because Khaba, the encumbent, had not received notification and the parties wished him to be present. On 21 December Heenen and Mzimela advised that they wanted to be involved in the proceedings and cross-question witnesses. Khaba elected to remain as an observer.

Background to the dispute

In 2004 the applicant applied for post 1457, namely superintendent at CSC Esikhaweni. It was common cause that she had been a CSC commander at Esikhaweni since 2002. Despite that, she was not on the preferred list and Khaba was appointed. As he came from a communications background, the applicant felt that management had not applied fair criteria in making the appointment. The respondent disagreed and advised that they applied the criteria set out in National Instruction 1/2004. The post of CSC head carried additional responsibility and the panel did not deem the applicant to be the most suitable candidate for the position.

Survey of the evidence

Applicant

Nokukhanya Florence Zibani testified that she had 20 years service in the police force. She was currently a captain and had held that rank for 5 years. She had a matric and a Police Management diploma. In addition to that she had attended six courses (at 98). In 2001 she did the CAS course, in 2002 she did a client service centre course, in 2003 she completed the mentorship course and in 2004 she attended the officer's programme, a circulation system course and a suicide prevention course. She also completed a service delivery course in 2001, although this was not reflected on her application for the post.

The applicant had been a relief commander from August 2000 to February 2002 and that meant she looked after one of the four reliefs. She was then promoted to CSC commander, at which stage she supervised the entire CSC, the court personnel and SAP 13 personnel. The job descriptions of a relief commander and a CSC commander were different and the CSC commander reported to the station commissioner. Because she had been working as a CSC commander, the applicant felt that she was a better candidate than Khaba. He was just a communications officer at the area office and her CSC experience was thus far greater.

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 3

The applicant rested her evidence at that point but after some prompting by myself, said she was not satisfied with the decision made by management so she lodged a grievance (at 54). In the reply she received from the respondent, she was told she had been ranked as the third preferred candidate. That was not, however, true and according to the preferred list the three candidates were Khaba, Mzimela and Heenen (at 141). The applicant also found it peculiar that Parts 1–3 attached to her application (at 102) were blank when she asked for copies and yet the documents presented by the respondent for the arbitration were completed. Her scored documents appeared at 152–153 and she didn't accept them.

The panel claimed they had addressed representivity and gender but they didn't because they would otherwise have promoted her. She was the only female at the station as a CSC commander and there were no other women in management at Esikhaweni. The equity plan for the area was never explained to her.

On cross-examination she confirmed that her length of service was not in her application form. That was because the only date for which she was asked was the date on which she had been promoted to her current rank. At the time she applied for the post she had 2 completed years in the rank of captain. The applicant had done six courses and also a course on service delivery improvement. Admittedly she had not made reference to that course in her application but every inspector did the course. It was also in her SAP 96. The applicant averred that her SAP 96 was in her application but she couldn't find it when asked to direct Buitendach to it. She then claimed it was an instruction for them to include the SAP 96. When asked to refer him to that instruction, the applicant said it was in the advertisement. She didn't have a copy of the advert. Mr Buitendach put it to her that the SAP 96 was not required by the panel and that only the application was taken into account. The applicant agreed.

When she was made the CSC commander she was a captain. The relief commanders of whom she was in charge were inspectors. If a captain were a relief commander, he would also command inspectors. It would be the same level as hers. The applicant agreed that some stations had a captain as a CSC commander and some had a captain as a relief commander. At Empangeni, for example, Mzimela was a captain but he was a relief commander. That was because it was a much larger station and Esikhaweni had not, at that time, been upgraded. The applicant denied that the captains at the larger stations had the same level of responsibility as she did and pointed out that they ran one relief whereas she ran four. She also managed the whole CSC and looked after court personnel and SAP 13 staff. The applicant conceded that she made no reference to managing the court staff and SAP 13 staff in her application form (at 100) but said it was in her job description. She admitted the panel didn't have her job description but insisted "everyone knew" that the CSC commander also ran the court personnel and SAP 13 staff. Mr Buitendach disagreed and  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 4
said that at some stations the commissioner ran that function. The applicant disagreed and said that in every single station the CSC commander performed that function.

The applicant believed she was a better candidate than Khaba because she was a CSC commander whereas he just did communications. It was true that he had 4 years experience in the CSC but that was just as a satellite commander. When referred to Khaba's application (at 92), it was pointed out that he also did community policing and was the youth desk coordinator. The applicant believed Khaba was the satellite station commander and reported to the CSC commander. She didn't know about his career and spoke from her understanding of what was happening at her own station. The applicant was not aware of the number of reliefs at a satellite station and couldn't dispute that they also ran four reliefs. Mr Buitendach put it to her that in the premises Khaba performed very similar functions in relation to his four reliefs. The applicant conceded that but said it was on a much smaller scale at the satellite station. She was of the view that the size of the station made a difference. She was not aware of the size of the satellite station Khaba commanded but believed it was only two people who were probably at the level of inspector. On further questioning she admitted she had no direct knowledge of Khaba's working environment.

The applicant did not do community policing nor was she a youth desk coordinator. She had also never worked in crime prevention and had only worked at the CSC. She did manage human and logistical resources but admitted that that wasn't in her application form. She didn't attend at scenes herself and just managed her members in performing that function. She had, however, attended crime scenes when she was involved with the crisis centre. The applicant agreed that Khaba had 8 years experience in detective investigation. She had 2 years experience at a crisis centre. Mr Buitendach put it to her that Khaba had skills he could pass on to others in the CSC who attended crime scenes. The applicant couldn't dispute that his experience was relevant but submitted that it was not a requirement in the advertisement. The advert only sought someone to manage the CSC and she had been doing that effectively for 2 years. She couldn't dispute that the panel looked at the candidates' total experience but insisted she had suitable experience for the post. She certainly had far more relevant experience than Khaba and actually performed the exact functions set out in the advert.

A copy of the advert was obtained and the applicant confirmed the job description contained therein. She admitted it did not set out every single task a commander would perform. KPAs were drawn up for commanders at the station and they all had the exact same job description. Mr Buitendach put it to her that she could not say with certainty that she had seen every job description for the entire area and she then admitted that she assumed they were all the same. She had actually only seen the documents at Esikhaweni. At this point I cautioned the applicant about giving such definitive evidence unless she was sure of her facts. Mr Buitendach then put it to her that she had likewise made an assumption that she was  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 5
the best person for the job. The applicant insisted that was based that on facts. She conceded that the wording of the advert was fairly broad and that it would permit the panel to take into account Khaba's experience as an investigator, but denied that experience was relevant to the advert.

The applicant couldn't dispute that Khaba also had a B Tech in Policing in addition to the qualifications she held and that he was studying towards a PR Management diploma. She insisted, however, that the panel should only have looked at the job description. It was put to her that according to Part 3, the panel had to take into account "prior learning, training and development" as one of the criteria and that they were thus justified in taking his qualifications into account. The applicant then agreed but reiterated that she was by far superior when it came to knowledge of the job. Khaba had done ten courses (at 91) but only one of them was relevant, namely the victim empowerment course. On further questioning she admitted that a number of other courses were also relevant, such as the detective training course, the diversity workshop and the performance management course. There was some debate about the relevance of the media course and the applicant disagreed that it would assist him in maintaining good public relations, which was one of the requirements for the post. She also conceded that they had to work on computers at the CSC and that his computer course and officers course would thus also be relevant. This meant Khaba had six relevant courses, which was the same as her. The applicant disagreed that this made him a good candidate and was adamant that her courses were more tailored to the CSC's core functions. She believed her suicide prevention course was far more relevant than his media course.

The applicant agreed that annexure A was distributed on the intranet and couldn't dispute that Parts 1–3 were part of it. Mr Buitendach put it to her that members often printed it out in its entirety and sent them the whole thing, including the blank pages. The applicant agreed. She also couldn't dispute that the panel printed their own copies of Parts 1–3 and used their own copies to score the candidates. She submitted, however, that it was also possible that they filled in her documents after Khanyile asked for them.

With regards the letter from DS Naidoo (at 55), the applicant said she believed that the area didn't promote equity when it promoted Khaba. She admitted she had testified that she didn't see the equity plan and when asked how she could then make such a submission, said she was complaining about the gender aspect and not equity. She based her submissions on what she knew and what she had seen at the CSC. In specific, she felt that gender was not addressed in her station. She was not aware, however, how it was addressed in the area, province or nation or whether the post was for a designated candidate only. She disputed that paragraph 5 was just a typing error and said that was not possible. SAPS documents did have errors in them but it was impossible for Naidoo to make a mistake in such a letter. He should have checked the panel's submissions before he replied to her. Mr Buitendach then referred her to her  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 6
grievance at page 2 and she confirmed that she had given it due consideration before she handed it in. He pointed out that in it she relied on section 11 of the Public Service Act 103 of 1994 whereas in the pre-arb minute she averred that appointments were regulated by the South African Police Service Act 68 of 1995 ("the SAPS Act"), employment regulations and National Instruction 1/2004. She admitted the latter document was correct but then changed her version and said the Public Service Act did apply. On further questioning she admitted she made a mistake and also admitted Naidoo made a mistake.

Respondent

Devendran Soobramoney Naidoo worked at the office of the area commissioner as head of HR for the Umfolozi area. He oversaw the administrative of the promotion process and sometimes sat as a panelist. Naidoo confirmed the advertisement for the post (at 154) and advised that he sat on the panel for post 1457. It was a paper board exercise so they had to go by what was on the applications. The panel looked at each application on its own merit and assessed it according to the criteria in the National Instruction. They compiled a short list and then further evaluated the short-listed candidates by looking at the criteria and the job description. Each panelist scored individually and then they discussed the applications to reach consensus. It was based on that score that they compiled their preferred list.

Heenen, Khaba and Mzimela were the preferred candidates and Zibani was also a candidate. She was on the short list (at 140) with seven others and received a total score of 18. Pages 142 onwards were the screening forms for the candidates along with their other evaluation forms. The minutes of the panel appeared at 49. At each step the panel deliberated and reached consensus. They looked at service delivery and, if necessary, equity when deciding who to put on the preferred lists. Khaba was the number 1 ranked candidate. There were no irregularities in the process and he guided the panel as to the HR requirements and procedure to be followed.

On cross-examination the witness was asked about the equity plan for the Umfolozi area. He explained that they critically needed to address the representation of coloured males, coloured females and African females. That was over all the levels and he couldn't recall off hand the needs at each salary level. The panel did address equity in their appointment. Esikhaweni had only one white person and no coloured or Indian employees but the panel did not follow the station plan. They followed the provincial plan and the provincial commissioner ratified the appointment after considering the issue of equity. The panel had to balance effective policing with equity and they did. Females were short-listed for this post but an African male was appointed. Females were appointed in other posts during that round.

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 7

Khaba's application (at 88) didn't list duties in the third column and instead cited a number of different posts. Naidoo disagreed and said the panel understood what he was conveying. He disagreed that Heenen's application was more correct and said there had been substantial compliance by Khaba. Mzimela had attached annexures which were not in compliance with the procedure and yet they took it into account. The panel didn't expect the members to be linguists or experts and accepted that candidates would all fill in their applications to the best of their ability. Nobody was prejudiced by poor grammar or drafting.

Administrative staff screened every application to check for the procedural requirements, for example eligibility for promotion. In order to do that screening, they used a persal printout. If the person didn't qualify, they listed them and informed the panel. The panel nonetheless received all the applications and then decided which candidates to reject and which to accept. Once that was done, they deliberated on the information in the application form and chose their short list. In casu they chose eight of the most suitable candidates and then picked the best of that group. In so doing they re-evaluated the candidates again and scored them. The panel used their own parts 1, 2 and 3 to do the scoring and did not use the documents attached to the applicant's application. The panelist's score sheets were attached to the minutes. They used a rating scale to determine the scores. A score of 5–6 was average and 7–8 was above average. In terms of training they gave a score for matric, one for diploma, one for degree and one for courses.

It was true that he erred in his response to the applicant's grievance and told her she had been rated third. He did that because he worked off a template but admitted he should have been more careful.

The panel considered the candidates in the light of the job description and the advert. The advert contained a summary of the core functions and that was what they used to assess the candidates. It had been derived from the standard job description for a CSC commander. The duties of a relief commander and a CSC commander were the same but the terms were used interchangeably depending on the status of the station. If one looked at Mandeni, Gingindlovu, Esikhaweni and Empangeni the job was basically the same but the level of responsibility was different and that affected the status of the station commissioner. That was why Mandeni was run by a captain and Empangeni by a director. The captains at the respective stations were at the same level but the level of responsibility might be different.

A satellite station was a fully fledged station in some areas and in others it was just a contact point for the community. In a contact office, it would be lower than a CSC but if it was a full satellite station, it might have as much or more responsibility than a CSC.

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 8

On re-examination Naidoo advised that Esikhaweni was a priority station which meant it need to address its service levels. The panel wanted a leader who would stand his or her ground and promote efficiency. All the candidates were suitable but one was better than the rest. The panel believed that Khaba's multi-skilled approach would suit the role and that his knowledge made him the most suitable candidate. They did consider the applicant and the gender issue but elected to recommend the candidate they believed to be the best.

Summary of argument

Due to time constraints, the parties agreed to submit written argument by 10 January 2007. As those arguments form part of the record I shall summarise them only briefly herein.

Mr Buitendach, for the respondent, argued that the applicant made numerous allegations and assertions about Khaba and his level of experience but admitted under cross-examination that she had no direct knowledge of his working conditions and based her evidence on her assumptions. She then failed to challenge Naidoo's evidence about the status and workings of a satellite station, the advantage of Khaba's varied experience and his media course. The applicant's case was simply that because she had been at CSC longer and worked as a commander, it made her a better candidate for the post. It was also alleged that the respondent did not apply employment equity properly, but on cross-examination the applicant admitted it was not a designated post and that she didn't really understand how the EE plan was implemented. Mr Buitendach argued that she failed to show that the panel acted unfairly or in contravention of the National Instruction. In addition, the applicant did not challenge the assessment of Mzimela or Heenen at all and thus could not claim she was the best candidate for the post, as they both scored higher than her.

Mr Khanyile, for the applicant, argued that she met all the requirements for the post and had 2 years experience as a CSC commander. Khaba had not been as exposed to the CSC as she had, and was thus not equal to her in experience. In addition, he had completed his annexure A incorrectly and told the panel of nine positions he had held instead of four. By selecting him, the panel failed to apply their minds correctly. They also didn't apply employment equity properly and, by their own admission, ought to have appointed a coloured male or female.

Analysis of the evidence

In terms of section 186(2) "unfair labour practice" means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving: 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 9
 "(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;

the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
the failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 200 (Act 26 of 2000) on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."

The applicant's dispute was lodged in terms of section 186(2)(a) and it is trite law that a promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds – that the procedure was not followed properly, that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides (see in this regard Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 and Goliath v Medscheme (Pty) Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 760 (IC)).

The applicant did not challenge her non-promotion on grounds of discrimination and her dispute related primarily to substantive and, to a lesser extent, procedural fairness. The applicant bears the burden of proof in this regard and has to prove, for example, that she was overlooked for an unfair reason; that the respondent failed to adhere to its promotion procedures or policies; that the respondent relied on irrelevant criteria in making the appointment; or that she was a better candidate than the person appointed. It is not, however, sufficient for the applicant only to prove the latter and she must also show that the respondent acted unfairly in so doing (Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA)).

I shall deal first with the procedural challenges and thereafter with the substantive challenge. In so doing, I must assess the competing versions of the parties as well as the documentary evidence before me.

The applicant was the sole witness for her case. She was a fairly reliable witness but did not fare well in cross-examination. There were numerous instances where the applicant insisted on a particular version, only to subsequently concede that her submissions were not based on direct knowledge but on an assumption. I refer, inter alia, to her arguments about the nature of work performed by Khaba at the satellite station when in fact she had no knowledge of where or how he worked, as well as her insistence that the SAP 96 was attached to her application only to later admit that it was not and furthermore that it was not taken into account by the panel. Indeed, there were a number of occasions when the applicant's assertions were shown to be incorrect but where she would still not make the concession (such as her submission that her grievance form was correct despite being directed to the correct Acts and Regulations  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 10
pertaining to her non-promotion). She also had to be cautioned a few times for seeking confirmation from her representative before answering a question.

The respondent's case was put forward by Senior Superintendent DS Moodley, who was a reliable witness. He readily made concessions when required to do so and there was no suggestion that he was dishonest in his evidence or had anything against the applicant. His evidence was concise and, for the most part, unchallenged. In the premises I have no reason not to accept his version.

With regard to the procedure adopted by the respondent, the applicant challenged the following, either by way of oral evidence or argument:

• the panel failed to apply the criteria listed in clause 12 of the National Instruction;

• her Parts 1–3 were blank when her union requested them;

• the panel failed to apply employment equity during the process;

• Khaba's application form was incorrectly completed and should have been rejected; and

• the letter replying to her grievance was incorrect and stated that she was the third preferred candidate

It was common cause that the policy document governing the posts for which the applicant applied was National Instruction 1/2004 entitled "Promotion of Employees of the Service to Post Levels 2 to 12". The relevant clauses under scrutiny were 2, 9(2), 10(1) and 12(1). For the record, I refer to the relevant extracts thereof below and include also the pertinent definitions:

Definitions

 . . .

'competence' means competence as defined in reg 2 of the South African Police Service Employment Regulations (in terms of that regulation competence is defined as a blend of knowledge, skills, behaviour and aptitude that a person can apply in the work environment and which are indicative of that person's ability to meet the requirements of a specific post);

 . . .

'recognizable experience' means any relevant experience in the Service or the Public service at the required level;
'suitability' means the suitability of an employee to function effectively at the next higher post level and may (my emphasis) be affected by previous findings of misconduct against the employee, previous convictions of the employee or pending investigations into misconduct or criminal offences allegedly committed by the employee; and

 . . .

Generic functions of evaluation panels (whether interviews are conducted or not)

 . . .

A panel must, in considering the applications for promotion, promote equal opportunities, fair treatment, employment equity and advance service delivery in the Service.

 . . .

Evaluation of applications (where no interviews are conducted)
If no interviews are conducted, only information contained in the candidates' applications may be considered by the panels. Personal knowledge of a candidate by members of the panel may not be taken into account to favour or prejudice a candidate. All applications must be evaluated against the criteria in paragraph 12.

 . . .

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 11
Criteria for selection of candidates
The selection of a candidate must be based on the following criteria:
competence based on the inherent requirements of the job or the capacity to acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job;
prior learning, training and development;
record of previous experience;
employment equity in line with the Employment Equity plan of the relevant business unit;
evidence of satisfactory performance;
suitability; and
record of conduct."

I shall deal with each procedural complaint in turn.

The applicant challenged the application of the equity plan and the application of the criteria in clause 12. She gave evidence that the panel didn't apply the criteria set out in the National Instruction because, if they had, they would have appointed her. There was, however, no corroborating evidence to support her argument and it was not even put to Naidoo when he testified. Naidoo on the other hand averred that the panel did apply the criteria prescribed in the National Instruction and his evidence in that regard was not challenged. In the premises I can find no foundation for the applicant's argument in this regard.

With regard to the employment equity plan, the applicant argued that the panel failed to apply the plan correctly and ought to have appointed a female. On cross-examination, however, she admitted that she had not been shown the plan for the area or province and was in fact not aware of how it worked. Naidoo gave evidence that the panel did apply employment equity in this round of promotions but pointed out that they were not obliged to appoint an equity candidate to the post as it was not a designated post. The panel was aware of the statistics for the province (ie the need for coloured males and females) and applied the provincial plan. They also considered the issue of gender and did apply their minds to the possibility of appointing a female. Khaba was, however, the superior candidate and they decided that business efficiency warranted his appointment. The provincial commissioner reviewed their decision and approved it. Naidoo noted that other females were appointed in that round of promotions and the applicant presented no evidence to rebut his assertions in this regard. There is accordingly simply no proof supporting her argument that the Employment Equity plan was not applied or was applied incorrectly.

The applicant also challenged Khaba's application form and Mr Khanyile argued that it was incorrectly completed and ought to have been rejected, because Khaba in fact listed nine posts he had held instead of three. This version was put to Naidoo when he testified and he disagreed. Naidoo gave evidence that there was nothing untoward about Khaba's application form and explained that the panel did not hold the members to perfect grammar and drafting. They accepted all applications provided they substantially complied with the requirements. His evidence was not contested and there is thus no basis for the challenge in this regard.

 
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 12

Further challenge was made to the documents on the basis that the applicant's Parts 1–3 were blank when given to her in preparation for the case and yet the respondent had a completed set of documents in its arbitration bundle; and on the basis that Naidoo's reply to the applicant's grievance letter was erroneous. The applicant suggested that the respondent had fabricated the score sheets after she lodged her dispute and further inferred that Naidoo had failed to apply his mind to her grievance in that he made a material error in her letter. Naidoo admitted to the error but explained that he had worked off a template and failed to make the necessary changes. His version was not challenged and appeared to have been accepted by the applicant's representative. The applicant also admitted on cross-examination that it was not uncommon for errors to appear in SAPS documents and, when pressed, admitted to the fact that she herself had made an error in her grievance document.

With regards the blank Parts 1–3, Naidoo explained that the entire application form was available to members on the intranet and many of them printed the entire document and submitted it. The panel, however, printed out their own Parts 1–3 and utilised individual blank copies for the scoring. It was those completed documents that the respondent had put in its bundle. Again, this version was not challenged or refuted and the applicant on cross-examination actually agreed with it.

Viewed in toto, I am satisfied that the procedure adopted by the respondent was fair. I therefore do not believe the applicant has discharged the onus of proving procedural unfairness.

The applicant also challenged substantive fairness and alleged she should have been appointed to the post. She compared herself to Khaba and averred that she had far more CSC experience than him and far more relevant courses. The applicant was of the view that her day-to-day functions were identical to those contained in the advertisement for the post and thus that she was well suited to do the job. It was her view that Khaba was not as suitable because he was working as a communications officer at the time of the promotion. On cross-examination, the applicant admitted that Khaba had a B Tech degree as well as a police diploma and that he had the same number of relevant courses as she had. The applicant disagreed that his media relations course was more relevant than her suicide prevention course and was adamant that her CSC experience rendered her superior. She admitted that Khaba had 4 years experience at the CSC but submitted that, as a satellite commander, his responsibilities were far less than hers. On questioning, it transpired that the applicant in fact had no idea where Khaba worked or what functions he performed. She also made much of the fact that she supervised the court personnel and SAP 13 staff but that information was not put into her application.

The respondent's witness, Naidoo, agreed that the applicant was a suitable candidate but averred that others were simply more suitable. The panel looked at Khaba's qualifications and experience and found  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 13
that he was well qualified for the post. He had 4 years CSC experience and also had other experience in crime prevention. The panel knew that Esikhaweni was a priority station and believed they needed a strong leader with all-round experience to take over the command. Khaba had a varied background and they felt that he was an ideal candidate for the job. It was not a case of the applicant being a poor candidate but simply a case of Khaba being better suited to the job requirements.

John Grogan in the matter of Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA) stated that the relative strengths and weaknesses of the candidates could not in themselves prove that the employer committed an unfair labour practice. He noted that commissioners were not intended to take on the role of recruitment agencies and said it was not their function to assess which candidate was best, but rather to ensure that the employer acted fairly in making its selection. The inferiority of the successful candidate was, he found, only relevant if it indicated that a superior candidate was overlooked for some unacceptable reason. This view was endorsed by the Labour Court in Ndlovu v CCMA & others (2000) 21 ILJ 1653 (LC), wherein the court held that it was not sufficient for a complainant to say that he or she was qualified by experience, ability or formal education but rather that the employer's decision to appoint someone else was unfair.

In Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 the issue was whether the respondent's conduct in not promoting the applicant to the position of assistant director amounted to an unfair labour practice. The commissioner assessed the facts and stated that the decision to promote an employee falls within the prerogative of management. He disagreed with the decision of George v Liberty Life Association of Africa Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 571 (IC) but supported the finding in Goliath v Medscheme (supra) wherein the court said that, where discrimination is not alleged, the applicant had to show "gross unreasonableness such that would lead to an inference of mala fides" before he could succeed with an unfair labour practice claim.

In casu, it could not be disputed that all of the preferred candidates had the requisite qualifications and some work experience. Naidoo's evidence that the panel looked at each candidate's entire career history was not disputed nor was his assertion that they believed a candidate with varied experience would be most suited to the post. There was nothing before me to suggest that this reasoning was somehow deficient or that it was grossly unreasonable. The mere fact that the applicant worked at the CSC as a commander did not automatically entitle her to the post and she still bears the burden of proving the decision to appoint Khaba ahead of her was incorrect and unjustifiable.

I am not willing to substitute my view for that of the panel where they are able to justify their decision and I believe they have done so in casu. I thus cannot see any basis for overruling the respondent's decision and do not believe it committed an unfair labour practice by failing to promote the applicant. There was no evidence of any mala fides or gross unreasonableness and it must be remembered that, in order to  
[2007] JOL 19581 (SSSBC) at 14
succeed on the merits, the applicant would not only have to be a better candidate than Khaba but also the other two preferred candidates. Despite being aware of that, she elected not to conduct any comparison with those persons. I thus cannot find any grounds for a claim of an unfair labour practice.

Award

The application is dismissed.

Appearance:
Mr Khanyile, SAPU (At); Superintendent Buitendach (R)


End of Document