



South African Transport and Allied Workers Union obo Mphahlele / Prasa t/a Metrorail – Gauteng North [2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GATW4944-14
Date: 17/12/2014
Before: W Koekemoer, Commissioner
Keywords


Application for leave to appeal from the Labour Court
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Sexual harassment — Employee fabricating charge of sexual harassment against manager when faced with disciplinary action for misconduct — Dismissal of manager unfair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a senior manager, was dismissed after having been found guilty of sexually harassing a female subordinate and for declining to discipline the same woman in return for “favours”. He denied sexually harassing anybody and accused the complainant and women who had supported her of conspiring to get rid of him.

The Commissioner noted that the onus rested on the respondent to prove that the dismissal was for a fair reason and in accordance with a fair procedure. The ultimate question was whether the respondent had discharged that onus. The first issue was whether the respondent had proved on a balance of probabilities that the applicant had contravened a workplace rule or standard. The applicant, who was at the time in an acting position, was determined to maintain discipline among his staff. He had confronted the complainant with an allegation that she had fraudulently signed an attendance register on a colleague’s behalf. Apart from the word of the complainant, the only evidence mentioned to support the charge that the applicant had kissed the complainant twice in his office were text messages the complainant claimed she had sent to a colleague. Copies of these messages had not been produced at either the disciplinary hearing or the arbitration. The complainant could not recall how she had allegedly been kissed. She had not immediately reported the alleged incident to the nearest security official. The probabilities favoured the applicant’s version, and indicated that the complainant was untruthful.

Turning to the pre-dismissal procedure, the Commissioner noted that the respondent had failed to help secure the attendance of witnesses the applicant wished to call in both the disciplinary hearing and the arbitration. The respondent had also failed to follow its own code on sexual harassment.

The Commissioner ruled the applicant employee’s dismissal substantively and procedurally unfair and ordered the respondent to reinstate the applicant with full retrospective effect and to pay his legal costs.

 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 462

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
This matter was heard at the offices of the CCMA, Tshwane on 30 June 2014, 5 and 8 August 2014, 8, 9 and 10 October and on 26 November 2014.
The applicant was represented by Ms M Du Toit, an attorney at Du Toit Attorneys & Labour Law Practitioners. The respondent was represented by two attorneys of MNS Attorneys Inc, Ms Madiba the first four days of the arbitration and by Mr Mnyandu on the last day of arbitration. The proceedings were digitally recorded.
The parties initially handed up the applicant’s bundle “A” and the respondent’s bundle “B”. By agreement, further documents were handed up marked bundles “C”, “D”, “E”, “F” and “G”. The applicant questioned page 12(A) of the respondent’s bundle “B”, being a draft email, because of no proof that it was sent. The applicant also questioned a number of affidavits contained in the respondent’s bundle “B”, which were not utilised at the disciplinary inquiry. The respondent questioned the minutes dated 15 November 2013 (page 141 of the applicant’s bundle “A”) and insisted on proof.
The parties agreed to submit written heads of argument on 3 December 2014.
Due to the extent of the evidence in this matter, I applied to the National Director for an additional six day’s extension calculated from 3 December 2014 to deliver the award. The requested extension was granted.

Background to the dispute
The applicant was employed by the respondent since 22 September 2003. When the applicant was dismissed, he was employed as Acting Assistant Manager Support Services.
According to the respondent, the applicant committed acts of serious misconduct on 14 November 2013, which warranted his summary dismissal. The applicant was suspended on 18 November 2013.
On 2 December 2013, the respondent handed a notice to the applicant to attend a disciplinary inquiry. The following charges were levelled against the applicant:
“1. Sexual Harassment

In that in your capacity as the Acting Assistant Manager Support on the 14th November 2013 between 09:00 and 10:00 in your office, you intentionally and inappropriately kissed Ms Irene Nthulane against her will, despite her disapproval and dislike of your actions. You did this knowing it was wrong to do so.

2. Sexual Harassment

In that in your capacity as the Acting Assistant Manager Support on 14 November 2013, between 09:00 and 10:00 while in your office you persisted to attempt to kiss Ms Nthulane again after you prevented her

from going out of your office. You continued to subject her to further harassment even though she has vehemently refused you her willingness. You did all these actions knowing it was wrong to do so.”

3. Gross Dereliction of duty

In that in your capacity as the Acting Assistant Manager Support on the 14th November 2013, you failed to take appropriate action against Ms Irene Nthulane when it was reported to you that she (Irene Nthulane) has fraudulently signed for Ms Caroline Biyela’s signing on and off document. You instead opted to offer her alternatives rather than taking corrective action against her. You did this knowing it was wrong to do.”

The disciplinary inquiry was held on various dates and it was finalised on 7 April 2014. The applicant was found guilty of “sexual harassment and gross dereliction of duty.” A sanction of summary dismissal was imposed stating “Dismissal from the premises of Prasa Metrorail with immediate effect.”
On 8 April 2014, the applicant referred an unfair dismissal dispute to this Commission. In his referral, the applicant stated:

“The applicant was dismissed for alleged sexual harassment and gross dereliction of duty in that as the acting Assistant Manager on 12 November 2013, he failed to take appropriate action against Irene, the testimony and closing argument of the applicant were not considered further, the chairperson was not neutral but biased, allegations against the applicant were not proven, the chairperson did not apply his mind correctly when imposing the sanction, and no valid reason for dismissal.”

  The applicant requested to be retrospectively re-instated.

The matter was subsequently scheduled for con/arb on 2 May 2014, and a certificate of non-resolution concerning unfair dismissal relating to misconduct was issued by Commissioner Ntsoane.
On 2 May 2014, the applicant filed a request for arbitration and the matter was then scheduled for arbitration as reflected in paragraph 1 above.

Issues to be decided
Whether the applicant’s dismissal was substantively and procedurally fair. Should the finding be that the applicant was dismissed unfairly, appropriate relief should be granted, as envisaged by the Labour Relations Act.

Points in limine
No points in limine were raised.

Survey of evidence and argument

The respondent’s case

The respondent’s representative indicated that she would call upon five witnesses to testify. The first witness, Ms Irene Rendani Nthulani, the complainant in this matter, testified as follows.

 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 464
On her next birthday she would turn 28. She is permanently stationed at Rissik station as Access Controller. She was sent to Pretoria station for further safety exposure and development.
On 14 November 2013, she and her supervisor, Ms Caroline Biyela, had to attend a meeting in Johannesburg. The applicant indicated that she should stay behind. Fifteen minutes later he called her to see him in his office, where she took a seat next to him. He then confronted her about her signing of the attendance register on behalf of Biyela on the Wednesday, 13 November.
She was surprised, as she thought the matter was dealt with when Scholtz confronted her indicating to her that she should not do it again.
The applicant indicated to her that he regards this conduct of her as being fraud and that she could lose her job. He gave her a choice to go back to Rissik station or to be charged from a disciplinary point of view. She did not make a choice at that stage. The applicant indicated to her that she could come back when she has decided.
She became emotional and started crying, as she could lose her job. The applicant indicated that “I make him feel bad for crying”. He touched her on the hand and pulled her up and when she was standing up he hugged her. He lifted her chin and kissed her. He then went to another table and telephoned Mr Mangena. He indicated to Mangena that he confronted her, the witness, about the attendance register and gave her the two above options. The call was ended. She approached the door to leave but the applicant barred the door to prevent her to exit. He tried to kiss her again. She pushed him back. She asked him whether she could leave. He indicated that she could not leave his office crying and that she should first wipe her face. She did that and then went to her office where she locked herself in her office. She was still upset.
She sent a WhatsApp message to Biyela indicating that the applicant kissed her. Biyela asked with a smiley face where and she indicated on her mouth.
She kept her door locked, as she was afraid that the applicant would return. She only unlocked the door when Biyela and Eddie arrived. She was still upset at that stage and told them what transpired between herself and the applicant.
She opted to channel her case via Employee Relations [“ER”].
She reported at Pretoria station on the Monday. The applicant confronted her regarding his indication that she should have reported to Rissik station. She did not go, as she had a meeting with ER.
She attended the meeting at ER and told Mr Mandla Masilela everything that transpired between herself and the applicant. Masilela explained to her what would happen and he called upon the investigators to do the necessary.
She denied that she had the benefit not to have returned to Rissik station and not to be charged for the register incident as a result of her alleged false allegation against the applicant. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 465
She denied that there was a cosy relationship between herself, “bra Mandla”, “Mamas Biyela” and “bra Eddie” as opposed to the relationship with applicant who was not referred to as “bra”.
She denied that there was a motive to get at the applicant due to him being a strict manager or to cover up her alleged fraud. She denied covering up for Biyela. She went to Masilela at ER, as he was available. She is unaware of bad blood between Masilela and the applicant.
She could not explain why two statements were made by herself. She confirmed the correctness of her two written statements. The statements were made in her home language and in English and were drafted by the investigators. According to her, differences in her two statements are a consequence of the English language.
She could not say what kind of kiss it was. Later, she added that lips were parted. The applicant did not succeed in kissing her a second time, as she pushed him away.
When the applicant confronted her with fraud, she cried as she is aware of what fraud amounts to. When she reflected in her statement the wrong hand being touched by the applicant, it amounts to nothing material.
She denied that she fabricated a story to save her job. She could not explain why the applicant was charged for not acting against her due to her falsification of the entry in the register. Similarly, she could not say anything to why Mangena is not testifying. She could not answer whether he was instructed not to testify. She conceded that she was aware that the applicant reported to Mangena.
According to her, the rule pertaining to signing the attendance register was not consistently applied. She did as everybody else did.
Nobody would barge into the office of the applicant without knocking on the door.
Outsiders cannot see into the office when the door is closed.

The second witness, Ms Nosipho Caroline Biyela, testified as follows.

The complainant joined her at Pretoria station for further exposure and development in the safety environment shortly before the incident of the alleged sexual harassment on 14 November 2013. The complainant was permanently employed as an Access Controller at Rissik station.
On 14 November 2013 she, the witness, attended a safety meeting in Johannesburg. The applicant contacted her that morning to establish where she was. She indicated to him that the practice was that she would sleep over at her parent’s home in Soweto on days where the meeting was to be conducted in Johannesburg the next day. As she was in the safety environment, she did work until the meeting took place. The applicant was not comfortable with this practice and confronted her with the fact that he was not informed of this practice. He indicated to her that the complainant would in any case stay in Pretoria on that day, 14 November, and that it was his instruction.
Her suggestion that she would immediately return to stay in Pretoria rather than the complainant staying, was rejected by the applicant. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 466
Later, the complainant reported to her by WhatsApp about the fact that the applicant kissed her. Quite a number of these messages were exchanged between herself and the complainant. She could not immediately show these text messages on request, as it would have to be searched for on her phone. She conceded that she never before showed these text messages to anybody. She denied that the version of what happened to these messages differs from the version she gave at the internal disciplinary inquiry.
The complainant was obviously upset that day of the harassment occurrence. The applicant at the time indicated that she would lock herself in her office with which suggestion she agreed. The arrangement was that she, the witness, would phone when she and Eddie, her colleague, were on their way to Pretoria. She did not reveal to Eddie what the complainant reported to her pertaining to the applicant’s conduct.
When she arrived at the office of the complainant later that day, she knocked and entered. The applicant was highly upset and cried bitterly. She calmed her down and requested Eddie to fetch some water, which he did. In this time space they agreed that the complainant would tell Eddie what happened that morning. The complainant then narrated to Eddie and herself of the applicant kissing her in his office that morning.
The applicant at a later stage indicated to her that he wants to see her, the witness. This time she was the one who had to stay at the office whilst her colleagues left for a safety meeting.
She was not afraid to meet with the applicant alone in spite of what happened to the complainant the previous day. On 14 November, the applicant postponed the meeting he wanted to have with her a number of times on that day until they ultimately met the next day, 15 November. When the applicant came to her office, he came and sat next to her indicating to her that he wants to see her on what he did to the complainant the previous day. She pretended to have known nothing about the incident.
She knows the applicant as a colleague for the past eight to nine years. Their relationship is nothing more than being collegial.
The general meeting she had with the applicant, the secretary of the applicant and Scholtz, turned on the filling out of the attendance register where the complainant irregularly filled out the register for herself, the complainant, and for her, the witness, Biyela. The applicant made it clear that the practice that colleagues could sign in and out for each other was to be stopped immediately. Scholtz suggested that before this rule could be enforced, a sensitising email should first be sent out to all involved.
According to her, the old practice to sign in and out for each other is still ongoing. Neither she nor any other employee were disciplined on this contravention. The signing of the attendance register by the complainant on her behalf was an isolated incident.
She denied that there was a plan with these allegations of sexual harassment against the applicant and that it amounted to a fabrication to get rid of the applicant. She denied that the benefit they could derive from this 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 467
  plan was to not be disciplined for their contraventions pertaining to reporting at the workplace.
She denied that there existed a relaxed way of doing things at the office and that they for this reason planned to get rid of the applicant, as he was a newcomer who did not fit in with their style of doing things. According to her, referring to some of her colleagues as “bra” does not amount to anything of importance. According to her, Mangena was not the applicant’s line manager.
She never received an instruction from the applicant to submit a proper report on the attendance register incident.
She was hospitalised early in December 2013 and it, amongst others incidents at the workplace, related to this incident. She is not prepared to say anything more.
She denied lying about the operational plan the applicant drafted.
She could not explain why her current testimony differs from her earlier written statement in this regard.
Why the complainant first reported about her being sent back to Rissik station rather than to first have mentioned the harassment does not particularly appear strange to her.
She is unaware that the complainant first had lunch before she reported the incident. According to her, due to the applicant’s history with women, he could not be believed where he denies sexually harassing the complainant. There were complaints in this regard.
She is aware that the complainant reported the incident to the union representative.

The third witness, Mr Frans Mokwala, testified as follows.

At the time of the incident, he was appointed as Acting Customer Services Manager. The complainant reported to him also that the applicant sexually harassed her by kissing her twice in his office the morning of 14 November 2013. He, the witness, informed the complainant of the two possible processes to follow in reporting a sexual harassment case. The complainant opted to follow the formal process.
The disciplinary inquiry of the applicant could not have been concluded within the permitted thirty days due to circumstances beyond the respondent’s control. Amongst others, the applicant requested an interpreter at a late stage, and the applicant was hospitalised for a substantial period. He could not explain further delays.
Although the applicant was in an acting position at the time, he is still classified as a junior employee and therefore the correct disciplinary procedures for junior staff were followed.
Up to the incident of the sexual harassment, he and the applicant had a normal relationship.
He investigated the allegation of fraud against the complainant and Biyela but could not detect any fraudulent conduct.
He comprehensively explained how management was structured. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 468
He questioned the applicant’s continued tendency to report to Mangena, as Mangena was on leave.
According to him, the applicant should have laid charges against the complainant or suspended her before he was suspended. He denied that he helped the complainant in any way to stay at Pretoria station. He simply did not detect any fraud by the complainant or Biyela in the signing of the attendance register.

The fourth witness, Mr Donald Macwele, testified as follows.

The respondent employs him as an Inspector at Protection Services. He investigated the complainant’s complaint about the alleged sexual harassment by the applicant on 14 November 2013. The complainant referred to the alleged irregular signing in and out on the attendance register. She then stated how it happened that she was kissed by the applicant on 14 November. She stated that the applicant gave her a choice to be sent back to Rissik station or to be charged for fraud for her conduct in filling out the register.
He took two statements from her. The second statement was to get clarity on certain issues and to deal with issues they did not deal with at the first interview. He also interviewed Biyela and the applicant.
He came to a finding that the complainant was lured into the applicant’s office where he planned to sexually harass her. The applicant first ensured that all the complainant’s colleagues were away for the morning, which then gave him the opportunity to do what he planned.
A later formal meeting was also arranged by the applicant pertaining to the issue of the filling out of the attendance register, but the complainant did not attend that meeting.
He denied that Trichardt, who actually had to authorise the investigation, was bypassed and that he, the witness, served somebody’s agenda. He was in fact objective in investigating the matter. HR advised him every step of the way. He was the one who decided which statements to take. There was no need to take a statement of Mangena. He is unaware that Mangena was instructed not to testify at this arbitration.
According to him, the applicant was the supervisor of the complainant. At the time of the alleged sexual harassment, the applicant was acting on behalf of Mangena. As Van Rensburg was working in Johannesburg, Mokwala was the responsible manager.
He learnt about this incident of sexual harassment only on the Monday, 18 November 2013.
He is aware of the formal and informal process in resolving a sexual harassment case. Mokwala did inform the complainant on the two processes.
He is unaware that there was a meeting between the applicant and Mangena on 13 November where it was resolved that the complainant would be sent back to Rissik station earlier. He is also unaware that the complainant was rostered to work at Rissik station as from 18 November. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 469
The fact that he wrote the statements and commissioned the statements is not unlawful or irregular.
According to him, the applicant is guilty as charged as, amongst others, other women also had complaints against the applicant.
He conceded that he never asked to see the SMS and WhatsApp messages on the phones of the complainant or Biyela.
He denied that he approached the taking of the statements of the witnesses with a pre-set mind as if the applicant was already guilty.
Masilela ultimately gave the instructions to him to investigate.
He is unaware of any bad blood between the applicant and Masilela and/or Mokwala.
He underwent general training on investigating crime. He did not have specific training on sexual harassment cases. This was the first sexual harassment case that he investigated. He could only deduce that most of the sexual harassment cases are dealt with informally. If that was not the case, they as inspectors would have been confronted with these kinds of cases more frequently.

The fifth witness, Ms Matlakala, testified as follows.

The respondent employs her as HR Assistant. She is, amongst others, responsible to schedule internal disciplinary inquiries. She was responsible to schedule the disciplinary inquiry sittings for the applicant’s case. She explained how it came about that the final sitting was only conducted on 7 April 2014. Amongst others, the sittings were postponed for representation for the applicant, for an interpreter for the applicant and for the applicant being hospitalised. She does not attend these disciplinary inquiries but Masilela informed her of the reasons for the postponements.
She arranged that the witnesses that were called upon to testify at the sittings of the applicant’s disciplinary inquiry were available. She could not be held responsible if they did not attend the sittings.
She confirmed that the applicant was suspended on 18 November. The charges were served on the applicant on 2 December. She was unaware that there was no sitting on 12 December.
She confirmed whom the witnesses were who had to testify at the applicant’s disciplinary inquiry. According to her, Mokwala was the applicant’s line manager and the individual who levelled the charges against the applicant. It was not for her to question the authority of the line manager or whether he was entitled to level the charges against the applicant.
She was not instructed to speed up the process to finalise the matter. She could merely speculate upon the reasons why witnesses did not attend to testify at the disciplinary inquiry.
She does not know why the witnesses of the applicant did not want to testify for the applicant even after they were served with subpoenas. She also does not know why the witnesses of the applicant were notified by the respondent that they should apply for leave if they wanted to testify for the applicant at this arbitration. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 470

The applicant’s case

The representative of the applicant called upon the applicant and two witnesses to testify. The applicant, Mr Moses Ngapane Mphahlele, testified as follows:

The respondent employed him since 2003. He was appointed as Acting Assistant Manager Support Services since the beginning of November 2013 and Mr Mangena signed his appointment letter. His monthly salary amounted to R21 667,88. As from 1 April 2014, an increase of 7.5 percent was implemented. When he was dismissed on 7 April 2014, he had ten years of service with the respondent. He also had a clean disciplinary record.
His first goal after being appointed as Acting Assistant Manager was to change an attitude of relaxation amongst staff members.
On 4 November when he entered the office of Biyela and the complainant, he saw the complainant playing a game on the computer. He confronted Biyela questioning her how she could allow this. He was then accused of being an “iron fist ruler.”
He disagreed with a statement that the complainant is an honest employee.
He noted that the complainant and Biyela covered up for each other since an earlier stage in their employment. Their relationship could be described as being corrupt. Previously at Rissik station the two of them teamed up against another colleague in changing workers’ perception towards this colleague to such an extent that the said colleague requested to be removed from Rissik station.
The filling out of the attendance register on 13 November at Pretoria station confirmed the nature of their relationship as being corrupt. According to him, for example, both the complainant and Biyela were absent on 12 November, but there was a cover up where the complainant on 13 November signed in for both of them for 12 November. This conduct by the complainant at the least amounts to a falsification of a clock card.
He and Mangena, his line manager, had a discussion regarding this incident on 13 and 15 November and he was authorised by Mangena to take the necessary steps. Although Mangena was on official leave, he, Mangena attended at a disciplinary inquiry of another employee on 13 and 15 November 2013.
On the morning of 14 November, he went to the office of Biyela and the complainant with the intention to confront them with the incident of the irregular filling out of the attendance register. He found Eddie and the complainant there. He only then learned from them that Biyela was already in Johannesburg to attend a scheduled meeting at 10am.
He phoned Biyela, indicating to her that he could not agree with her failure to first report for duty as is required. He instructed Eddie to join Biyela in Johannesburg for the meeting but instructed the complainant to come with him to his office. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 471
It was his intention to discuss the incident of the irregular filling out of the attendance register with both the complainant and Biyela, but individually. Due to Biyela being in Johannesburg, he could not confront the one after the other and he had to wait for Biyela to return.
In the meeting with the complainant that morning of 14 November, the complainant was obviously nervous. He initially made small talk with her asking her whether she was sleeping on duty. She denied the contention and indicated that she was thinking of her sick child at home with her mother. He asked her whether she would cope and asked her about her travel arrangements. He indicated to her that this meeting was not a disciplinary inquiry but that he was merely trying to establish how it came about that the register was filled out in an irregular manner. He then questioned why she signed in for Biyela. She explained to him what happened and that it was not a regular occurrence.
He then indicated to her that he regarded this in a serious light as it amounts to nothing else but fraud. He asked her how it came about that she was stationed at Pretoria station. She explained the she was there for development and that she applied for further exposure. He confronted her with the fact that by her conduct, she compromised trust that was placed in her. She then started crying. According to him, these tears have been faked. He indicated that he could not trust her and that she should report at Rissik station as from Monday 18 November. He also indicated that the incident of the irregular filling out of the attendance register would be investigated further. He then contacted Mangena and briefed him on what transpired. He indicated to him that the complainant will report at Rissik station from Monday 18 November. Mangena confirmed that he should confront Biyela about the incident. The telephone call lasted for approximately three to five minutes. The complainant then left. He contacted the station manager at Rissik station who welcomed the decision and indicated that she needed the applicant operationally.
He could not meet with Biyela on 14 November, despite of his attempts.
On 15 November, he instructed Biyela to stay at the office in Pretoria and that Eddie and the complainant should leave for the meeting.
Fifteen minutes later, the complainant approached him alone, indicating to him that she was not feeling well, that she would rather stay, and that Biyela should be released to attend the meeting. He instructed her that if it was a case that she was indeed not feeling well, she should consult a doctor or go home.
Scholtz, the whistle blower, requested a meeting on 15 November pertaining to the proper filling out of the attendance register. Said meeting was conducted and the minutes reflect a correct version of what took place. Biyela’s timeous reporting at her workplace was questioned at the meeting.
At the end of the formal meeting he requested Biyela to stay. He confronted her with her failure to take corrective measures against the complainant where she signed the register irregularly. He also confronted her with her practice to stay in Johannesburg and to attend meetings without 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 472
  properly reporting for duty. He emphasised to her that he would investigate this matter.
He gave the necessary attention to the issues of the irregular signing of the attendance register, that is, as far as his powers allowed him and before he was suspended on 18 November.
On 13 and 15 November he and Mangena discussed this conduct by the complainant and Biyela as an issue for further disciplinary attention.
Only a head of a department had the authority to take the matter further.
He instructed Biyela to submit a particular report. He was disappointed with the report she gave him, being a filthy piece of paper with some notes. He signed the paper to ensure that the content could not be changed. He instructed her for a proper typed report together with her signed notes. She was supposed to submit it to him on that Monday, 18 November 2013, but she contacted him reporting that she was ill.
On the same Monday, Scholtz indicated to him early that morning that the complainant reported for duty at Pretoria station and not at Rissik station. He then requested his secretary, Kgomotso, to accompany him to the complainant’s office, as he had to take disciplinary steps. On confronting the complainant, she denied that she had to report at Rissik station. She explained that she was in fact given an option by him, which is to return to Rissik station or to be acted against from a disciplinary point of view. He denied that he ever gave her an option in this regard. On her indication, he then asked her which option she chose. She indicated that she would go to Rissik station by train.
According to him, he never gave her a choice. His specific instructions to her were to report to Rissik station on Monday, 18 November. He also indicated to her that the incident of the filling out of the register would be investigated.
He never touched or sexually harassed the complainant.
On or about 3:30pm on 18 November, he was confronted by two inspectors regarding the allegations of sexual harassment. This was the first time he heard about this. He signed statements the inspectors drafted. They took him to Mokwala who ultimately suspended him.
Procedurally his case was also not handled correctly. A head of the department had to give a mandate to investigate, which did not happen. How the case was channelled was procedurally incorrect. There was no employee wellbeing assistance and he had to take own initiative. In this whole process he enjoyed no rights. He was exposed rather than to have been protected.
There was no attempt to resolve the issue informally as per the procedure. The procedure does not allow any option to the complainant to choose the formal or the informal route.
He was notified on 2 December of the disciplinary inquiry to be conducted. He filled out the annexure indicating who his representative would be, whether he needed an interpreter and he listed his required witnesses. He indeed submitted this annexure as was required. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 473
On 12 December, a bundle of documents was served on him at his home. His first disciplinary inquiry appearance was on 17 December. An argument ensued at the inquiry on the fact that no interpreter was arranged and that his arranged witnesses were not present. The inquiry was postponed.
On 17 January 2014, the initiator was reported being ill and two of his witnesses were not present.
The next sitting, 22 January, he fell ill and he was admitted to hospital. Subsequent medical reports that he should be assisted by employee wellbeing were not adhered to. He, his wife, and four children suffered immensely due to the unfair process he was subjected to. He was released from hospital on 14 February.
On 14 March, the next date of the disciplinary inquiry, the case could not be proceeded with due to the initiator’s wife falling ill. The initiator had to rush to hospital. The disciplinary inquiry continued on 3 April and it was concluded with on 7 April. On the same date, he had to submit mitigating factors. He was found guilty and dismissed on the same date, 7 April. The chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry was overtly biased. His job grading was on the same level as that of the chairperson. The correct disciplinary code and procedure was not utilised. Mokwala was not merely observing when he was suspended, he actually took the decision.
His witnesses were compelled by the respondent to apply for leave to testify for him. Mangena was instructed by his seniors not to testify for him, as he was told that he may not testify against his employer. The fact that Mangena did not testify for him was to his prejudice, as Mangena had comprehensive background on this matter. All along he battled to get his witnesses to testify for him. The respondent was obstructive despite of the witnesses being served with subpoenas.
At the disciplinary inquiry, mention was made of SMS messages between the complainant and Biyela but back then they already indicated that it was deleted. Biyela’s indication at arbitration that she wanted time to look for the SMS messages demonstrated that she revealed untruths. Up to date, as far as he is aware of, no disciplinary action was taken against the complainant and Biyela.
The complainant is still working at Pretoria station.
He is an individual with perseverance and integrity and would “love to see himself back there.”

The second witness of the applicant, Mr John Makgahlela, testified as follows.

He is employed by SATAWU. He represented the applicant at the entire internal disciplinary inquiry.
According to him, the respondent was timeously notified of the names of the applicant’s witnesses. According to respondent’s policy, witnesses had to be released by the employer unconditionally.
In many ways the applicant was not treated fairly. No employee assistance was granted and the entire investigation was done improperly. The chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry was indeed biased. The dismissal of the applicant was indeed orchestrated. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 474
The witnesses of the applicant later also indicated that they were not prepared to testify at arbitration. According to him they feared for their employment. It later became apparent that only the witnesses of the applicant had to apply for leave if they were to testify at arbitration. The applicant’s witnesses were even served with properly issued subpoenas. In this regard Masilela accepted the subpoenas for service.
He submitted to the chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry that charges 1 and 2 should be combined as it relates to the same charge and that charge 3 should be withdrawn. These submissions and many more submissions were simply not objectively regarded by the chairperson.
The respondent also failed to hand to the applicant a copy of the recording of the disciplinary inquiry. This was not in line with respondent’s policy.

The applicant’s third witness, Ms Van Tonder, testified as follows.

Du Toit Attorneys employs her as a candidate attorney. She attended to ensure the issuing of the subpoenas for the applicant’s witnesses. She obtained the names from a secretary at the respondent.
The CCMA issued the subpoenas on 31 July 2014 and she served it on the witnesses by means of email on 4 August.
A certain Marlene of the respondent contacted her and indicated that should the witnesses wish to testify, they should apply for leave. This was upsetting to the witnesses. Said Marlene also confirmed that the witnesses indeed received the subpoenas.
She telephonically contacted Mangena who informed her that he was instructed that he may not testify against the respondent being his employer.

Argument

Both parties submitted written heads of argument on 3 December 2014. Only some salient points are reflected.

Respondent’s argument
The respondent’s representative argued as follows:
The dismissal of the applicant must be upheld as fair, amongst others, as the witnesses of the respondent, at least Mokwala and Macwele, presented credible evidence.
It is submitted that there clearly seems to have been fabrication of facts between Ms Miriam Bopape and the applicant.
Material allegations lacked in the applicant’s statement.
The applicant failed, to his own prejudice, to call the chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry. The applicant also failed to apply for the recusal of the chairperson.
The respondent questioned the contention of the applicant that the respondent unnecessarily dragged their feet in finalising the disciplinary inquiry. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 475
The applicant played a major role in the postponements of the disciplinary inquiry, amongst others, by not submitting the names of his witnesses timeously and by his hospitalisation in January and February 2014.
He submitted that the respondent proved substantive and procedural fairness.
He requested that the case of the applicant be dismissed.

Applicant’s argument
The representative of the applicant submitted that:
The dismissal of the applicant was procedurally unfair.
The respondent also did not prove substantive fairness.
The respondent did not follow its own disciplinary code and procedure on sexual harassment cases.
A formal route could only have been followed after an informal process failed.
Witnesses of the applicant were irregularly kept or discouraged from testifying at arbitration.
Conclusion of the disciplinary inquiry was unnecessarily dragged out.
The disciplinary inquiry amounted to a sham.
Inadmissible hearsay evidence was presented at the disciplinary inquiry.
The line manager of the applicant, Mangena, should have been called by the respondent to testify at the disciplinary inquiry.
There was a conspiracy to get rid of the applicant.
No assistance was given to the applicant in this period despite of a specific doctor’s request.
The applicant was not provided with certain of the statements of witnesses up to arbitration.
The complainant made two statements, which differed in material aspects.
There are two mutually destructive versions.
By fabricating a version of sexual harassment, the complainant gained by not being investigated for fraud and she is still working at Pretoria station.
The respondent is not consistent in applying discipline.
Probabilities favour the applicant.
She requested reinstatement for the applicant and back pay as from 8 April 2014.
Due to obstructive conduct by the respondent, the applicant’s representative requested a punitive order for costs in favour of the applicant. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 476

Analysis of the evidence and argument
Onus of proof
According to section 192(2) of the Act, if a dismissal is established, the employer has to prove that such dismissal was fair.

Substantive fairness

Misconduct
Insofar as substantive fairness is concerned, the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, as contained in Schedule 8 to the Labour Relations Act, sets out the guidelines for employers to follow when dismissing an employee for misconduct. In terms of item 7 of Schedule 8 to the said Act, the employer is required to show:
That the employee contravened a rule or standard.
That the rule or standard was valid and reasonable.
That the employee knew or should have known the rule or standard.
That the rule or standard was applied consistently, and
That dismissal was a fair and appropriate sanction.
In the matter of Solidarity on behalf of Van Zyl v KPMG Services (Pty) Ltd and others (2014), it was held that:
“[11] The proper approach of a court (or arbitrator) which is called upon to determine which of two mutually destructive versions should be accepted was related in the judgment of Stellenbosch Farmers’ Winery Group Ltd and others v Martell et Cie and others 2003 (1) SA 11 (SCA) at 14J–15E, where Nienaber JA is reported as follows: . . .
[12] That judgment emphasises the interrelationship of credibility of the witnesses, their reliability and the probabilities. However, it is to be borne in mind that the ultimate decision which a court, or an arbitrator (as the case may be) must determine is whether on the issue in question the party which bears the onus has discharged it. [My emphasis.] In cases concerning the fairness of dismissals under the LRA, the party which bears the onus of justifying the dismissal is the employer. The question which the arbitrator must ask in discharging its duties as such is where the probabilities lie. If the probabilities favour the employer, it may well discharge the onus of proving the dismissal was fair. If they do not, the employer may fail.
[13] The importance of credibility has sometimes been over-estimated. An assessment of evidence on the basis of credibility only, without regard for the underlying probabilities, is inappropriate — indeed, it constitutes a misdirection. (See Medscheme Holdings (Pty) Ltd v Bhamjee 2005 (5) SA 339 (SCA) at 345A.)
[14] The proper approach was expressed by Eksteen in National Employers General Insurance Co Ltd v Jagers 1984 (4) SA 437 (E) at 440D–H, which is to the following effect:

“It seems to me, with respect, that in any civil case, as in any criminal case, the onus can ordinarily only be discharged with adducing credible evidence to support the case of the party on whom the onus rests. In a civil case the onus is obviously not as heavy as it is in a

criminal case, but nevertheless where the onus rests on the plaintiff as in the present case and where there are two mutually destructive stories, he can only succeed if he satisfies the Court on a preponderance of probabilities that his version is true and accurate and therefore acceptable, and that the other version advanced by the defendant is therefore false or mistaken and falls to be rejected. In deciding whether the evidence is true or not, the Court will weigh up and test the plaintiff’s allegations against the general probabilities. The estimate of the credibility of a witness will therefore be inextricably bound up with a consideration of the probabilities of the case and, if the balance of probabilities favours the plaintiff, then the court will accept his version as being probably true. If, however, the probabilities are evenly balanced in the sense that they do not favour the plaintiff’s case any more than they do the defendant’s, the plaintiff can only succeed if the Court nevertheless believes him and is satisfied that his evidence is true and that the defendant’s version is false.”

In similar fashion the Commissioner held in the case of Nkadimeng and Omega Risk Solutions (Pty) Ltd (2012), “Sexual harassment is seldom perpetrated in public and it is often a case of the complainant’s word against that of the alleged perpetrator.”
The Commissioner in said case cautioned himself in weighing the evidence by stating:
“[71] I am aware of the fact that Ms . . . and Ms . . . were both single witnesses and that their evidence has to be weighed with circumspection, but the cautionary rule of the criminal courts is not applicable. The respondent was only required to prove its case on a balance of probabilities. (My emphasis.)
The Commissioner further determined in the said case that the results of the polygraph tests tipped the scale in favour of the respondent.
In casu, the first question to be answered is whether the applicant contravened the rule or standard in his place of work. The onus of proof required is a balance of probabilities.
The evidence revealed that since the beginning of November 2013, the applicant was promoted to an acting position. The applicant made it clear in no uncertain terms that he intended managing discipline.
On 4 November 2013, the applicant witnessed that the complainant played a computer game during working hours. He confronted Biyela there and then, questioning her failure to address the non-performance of the complainant. On 14 November, when he intended to confront Biyela about the irregular filling out of the attendance register on 13 November, he learned that Biyela was prematurely in Johannesburg where the meeting was only scheduled for 10am. He contacted Biyela, emphasising to her that he does not agree with her practice to attend a meeting prematurely without reporting for duty as usual. On 15 November, he confronted Biyela about the irregular filling out of the attendance register on 13 November. In the discussion he had with the complainant on 14 November, he made it clear that he considered the way the attendance register was filled out as fraud and that he viewed this in a very serious light. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 478

  He also indicated to the complainant that she should return to Rissik station as from Monday, 18 November.

The relevant question to be answered in this alleged unfair dismissal case is whether the applicant indeed committed an act of sexual harassment against the complainant. The more pertinent question to be answered, in fact, is whether the respondent proved this conduct of the applicant, taken on a balance of probabilities.
If it is found that evidence lacked to prove sexual harassment, it would be the end of the case relating to charges 1 and 2.
The complainant’s case is based on her allegation that the applicant kissed her that morning of 14 November in his office after he confronted her with an act of fraud, instructing her to return to Rissik station on the Monday or to be subjected to a disciplinary investigation. According to the complainant, the applicant again kissed/attempted to kiss her after the telephone discussion he had with Mangena when she was on her way out of his office. The complainant’s case is further based on SMS and Whatsapp messages that were exchanged between the complainant and Biyela on that morning of 14 November. These messages were only seen by the complainant and Biyela. The law of evidence still applies and he/she who alleges must prove. This rule applies equally for male and for female witnesses.
In the event that I was the investigator, the said text messages between the complainant and Biyela would have been my first pieces of evidence I would have gathered and secured. Why and how could the complainant’s allegations of sexual harassment have been accepted just like that, without any circumspection?
In the Nkadimeng and Omega Risk Solutions case, a relatively small employer even called in the assistance of a polygraphist with polygraph tests, before charging the perpetrator. This cautionary step was taken by the said employer in spite of the limited evidential weight of a polygraph test. Ultimately, these polygraph tests tipped the scale in favour of the employer. The alleged sexual harassment allegations by two complainants in that case were not sufficient to spark immediate further action against the alleged perpetrator. Unnecessary exposure of the alleged involved individuals was also limited by doing so.
Ultimately, it was required of the respondent to prove the act of sexual harassment. Many questions remained open, even at the end of arbitration, and the question could actually be posed of why this matter proceeded to the stage of a disciplinary inquiry with almost no material evidence or only with evidence that lacked corroboration. During cross-examination, for example, the complainant could not even answer a simple question of how she was kissed. As an afterthought, unconvincingly, she later added that lips were parted. Further questions, which remained open and unanswered, amongst others, were why the complainant did not run for the door or even attempted to run when she could have done so after the first alleged kiss by the applicant and while the applicant was on 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 479
  the phone with Mangena? Mangena could have assisted by presenting viva voce testimony, ie the time of the call from the applicant.
The complainant’s conduct after the alleged incident, that is locking herself inside her office, is questionable in light of the fact that she did not run from his office when she could. Running from the applicant’s office immediately after being kissed by the applicant into her office would have been a more convincing version. Why did the complainant not run towards the nearest security official? Biyela was in Johannesburg at that stage and could not have been of any assistance. The complainant was at Pretoria station, a busy station where security officials most probably were around and in a security environment the complainant could reasonably expected to be familiar with. Probabilities suggest that the complainant’s claim of sexual harassment came as an afterthought, most probably after she had a discussion with Biyela.
Probabilities simply do not lie with the case of the respondent.
I rejected the version of the complainant that she was touched or kissed by the applicant on 14 November on the basis that her version is probably not the truth, or stated differently, the respondent simply failed to prove their case of sexual harassment.
The respondent also failed to prove charge three against the applicant. The evidence presented indicated that the applicant took the required preliminary steps against the complainant within his authorised powers and within the time to his disposal before being suspended. Even in the event that I arrived at a conclusion that the applicant was in fact shown to have been guilty of all three charges, to which decision I did not arrive at, the appropriateness of the dismissal of the applicant, given the totality of the circumstances, was not proved. No evidence was before me why the respondent did not consider disciplinary action short of dismissal. The chairperson of the disciplinary inquiry, who took the decision to dismiss the applicant, was not called as a witness by the respondent. This failure by the respondent was to its own peril.
“The Constitutional Court in the Sidumo case specifically referred to ‘the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal’. The Constitutional Court, significantly, did not sanction the notion that serious misconduct warrants automatic dismissal.”

“. . . The notion that automatic dismissal is warranted the moment an employee is found guilty of serious misconduct militates against every dictate of fairness.” (National Union of Metalworkers of SA on behalf of Muroa and Van De Wetering).

Stated differently, sexual harassment, if found to have been committed, in itself does not necessarily warrant dismissal. The applicant has a clean disciplinary record and the alleged kissing of the complainant would have been an isolated incident. Taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively unfair.

 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 480

Procedural fairness
The respondent failed to take reasonable steps to arrange that witnesses of the applicant be present at the disciplinary inquiry. This approach of the respondent was continued with at arbitration. Mangena’s absence as a witness, to mention only one of the absent witnesses, left many questions open and unanswered and was indeed not conducive to the fairness of the process.
I also find that the respondent’s failure to properly follow its own code on sexual harassment cases to have been unfair.
The principle of an informal route as opposed to a formal disciplinary route is also underlined in the Code of Good Practice relating to sexual harassment cases, a code overtly not being regarded by the respondent. There was a total lack of evidence pertaining to show that the respondent first considered corrective measures against the applicant before imposing a sanction of dismissal. Uncontested evidence indicated that the applicant had more than ten years of employment with the respondent and he had a clean disciplinary record.
See:
Solidarity on behalf of Van Zyl v KPMG Services (Pty) Ltd and others (2014) 35 ILJ 1656 (LC);
Nkadimeng v Omega Risk Solutions (Pty) Ltd (2012) 33 ILJ 1747 (CCMA);
National Union of Metalworkers of SA on behalf of Muroa and Van De Wetering (Pty) Ltd t/a Afrit (2011) 32 ILJ 1000 (BCA)
The dismissal of the applicant was substantively and procedurally unfair.
After considering the evidence at this proceedings and the totality of the circumstances, I could not find any reason why the applicant could not be awarded the prime remedy of re-instatement.

Award
I herewith order that:
The respondent, Prasa t/a Metrorail Gauteng North, must re-instate the applicant, Mr Moses Ngapane Mphahlele.
Re-instatement must be effected as from the date of his dismissal, 7 April 2014, on the same terms and conditions of employment that applied to the applicant, prior to his dismissal.
The respondent must pay to the applicant back pay representing nine months’ salary, calculated as follows: 
The above amount of R209 636,73 is payable by the respondent, Prasa t/a Metrorail Gauteng North, to the applicant, Mr Moses Ngapane Mphahlele, not later than 7 January 2015. 
[2015] 4 BALR 461 (CCMA) at 481
The applicant must report for duty at the respondent on 7 January 2015 or the next day after receiving this award, whichever the earlier.
Law and fairness dictates that a cost order is awarded in favour of the applicant. The respondent must pay the applicant’s legal costs in terms of the Rules of this Commission of the tariff applicable in the Magistrate’s Court. The said costs are payable by the respondent, Prasa t/a Metrorail Gauteng North, to the applicant, Mr Moses Ngapane Mphahlele, within 7 (seven) days from date of taxation of the bill of cost.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document