



Manyeruke / Metso Minerals [2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Metal and Engineering Industries Bargaining Council
Case No: MEGA27885
Hearing Date(s): None Indicated
Award Date(s): 07 / 05 / 2010
Bench: R Bracks


Keywords


Labour Law — Unfair labour practice — Disciplinary procedure — Employer convening fresh inquiry after matter remitted by appeal board — Procedure not unfair as employer entitled to rectify earlier irregularities with fresh hearing

Mini Summary


After thieves broke into a company vehicle and stole tools used by the applicant, the respondent conducted a disciplinary hearing. The applicant was required to repay the value of the tools. He appealed, and the respondent convened a fresh hearing because the first hearing was judged procedurally flawed. The applicant declined to attend the second hearing. He claimed that he was victim of an unfair labour practice because of the manner in which the hearing was conducted. The respondent contended that the hearing had been conducted fairly, and that it was entitled to reclaim money lost through its employees' negligence.

The commissioner noted that the matter had been referred to an independent chairperson for rehearing, and the applicant had refused to participate in the second inquiry. The respondent was entitled to rectify the earlier procedural irregularities by convening a fresh hearing, and could not be held liable for the applicant's refusal to participate. The applicant's contention that he had been treated inconsistently was a mere afterthought.

The application was dismissed.

 
[2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC) at 1




Award

[1]  .  Details of hearing and representation

This is an award of the arbitration held on 15 April 2010 at the offices of the Centre for Dispute Resolution in Johannesburg. The applicant was unrepresented. The respondent was represented by Mr Victor Mohlathe its Human Resource Director. The proceedings were recorded both manually and electronically.

[2]  .  The issue to be decided

The issue to be decided is whether or not the disciplinary action taken by the respondent constituted an unfair labour practice.

[3]  .  Preliminary issues

None.

 
[2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC) at 2

[4]  .  Summary of evidence

4.1  The applicant's case

To support his case that the respondent had committed an unfair labour practice the applicant testified as follows: 

The respondent failed to follow procedure by not disciplining him timeously – it took them eleven days. He believed that by that time he would have forgotten some of the information. At the first hearing the chairperson played an investigating role because he did an inspection in loco.

In addition, the code stipulated that his supervisor should present the facts, however, the facts were presented by the manager of the department. He appealed the outcome and the appeal was heard. At the appeal hearing, it was decided that the matter should be re-heard. The same people who sat at the first hearing were also at the second hearing.

Furthermore, the chairperson at the first hearing departed from the code when presenting the sanction as the code makes no provision for charging employees for losing company property. He therefore acted outside his jurisdiction. This was unfair.

In respect of the charge, he stated that they did not call Ben and the matter was sent for re-hearing. According to him, he was not negligent in any way as he parked the vehicle in a well-lit place; it was locked and it was then broken into. Under the circumstances, he can therefore not be held liable for what had happened because he had done everything humanly possible to prevent the loss. He then reported the matter to both his supervisor and the company and he should not be held responsible for the acts of criminals.

Moreover, he believed the company had treated him unfairly because he used his own tools for company business but when the company lodged the claim for insurance purposes he was requested to remove his tools from the list.

The company also acted inconsistently as this was not the first time a vehicle was broken into and tools stolen. He had a list of people that were involved namely P Maseaphata, William Mohle, Walter Soamane and Themba Phetla. None of them was disciplined. He was singled out. He was now forced to buy tools which he had lost doing company business.

Under cross-examination, it was put to the applicant that he had received the notice timeously. He was referred to annexure A. The applicant denied this. He conceded, however, that the charge of negligence was based on the fact that he had not placed the canopy on the bakkie. He further conceded that the person who charged him was his direct supervisor. However, he argued that the supervisor was not on duty on the day the incident occurred and therefore he should not have been the one to charge him. When asked if he believed the chairperson was wrong he answered in the affirmative. It was then pointed out to the applicant that the chairperson had the right to refer an appeal for re-hearing.

The applicant also conceded that he had gone to the second hearing but refused to participate because he believed he would not be given a fair hearing despite the fact that it was common cause that the second hearing was chaired by a different person.

 
[2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC) at 3

[4.2]  The applicant's closing arguments

The applicant submitted that they did not follow proper procedure as they interfered with the witnesses; the chairperson was the investigator and therefore was not impartial. He also submitted that he was not disciplined timeously and the sanction he was given was not in the code. Also, the person who brought the charges against him was not competent as he was not present on the day of the incident. They acted inconsistently in charging him.

In respect of the second hearing, it only took place four months after the incident. At the appeal, it became clear that the chairperson was biased and he was convinced that he would not receive a fair hearing. He prayed that I should overturn the sanction given at the second hearing. 

[4.3] The respondent's case

The respondent called no witnesses as it alleged that the applicant had failed to discharge his onus.

[4.4]  The respondent's closing arguments

The respondent submitted that the applicant had failed to discharge his onus; he failed to show that there were any irregularities. At no time during the hearing did he raise any objections. Also, the appeal chairperson had the right to refer the matter and the second hearing was chaired by an independent chairperson.

The case against the applicant was in accordance with the company’s code. The company had the right to take action against the applicant especially if he lost the tools given to him by the company through negligence.

The applicant never raised the issue of inconsistency as it would have been in his appeal if he had done so. If he had attended the second hearing he would have had the opportunity to raise the issue. As far as the company was concerned the correct procedure had been followed as it was identified in the appeal that there were irregularities and therefore the matter should be re-heard.

[5]  .  Analysis of evidence and argument

The Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 ("LRA") prohibits unfair labour practices. An unfair labour practice is any unfair act or omission at the workplace, involving:
unfair conduct of an employer relating to the promotion or demotion or probation of an employee;
unfair conduct relating to the provision of training of an employee; 
unfair conduct relating to the provision of benefits (for example, pension, medical aid, etc) to an employee; 
unfair disciplinary action against an employee (short of a dismissal). For example, a final written warning or unfair suspension; 
the refusal to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any  agreement. For example, a retrenchment; 
an occupational setback in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 because an employee has made a protected  
[2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC) at 4
  disclosure defined in that Act. For example, an employee is denied overtime because he made a disclosure in terms of the “Disclosure of Information Act.”
From the evidence presented it is clear that the applicant attended a first hearing which he appealed. He was successful in his appeal. The outcome Annexure C stipulated that:

"The appeal is upheld on the basis of serious irregularities (procedural) which may have affected the outcome or verdict. – Case is referred to an independent chairperson for a rehearing."

The undisputed evidence is that the company had called for the rehearing of the matter which the applicant attended. However, he refused to participate as he believe that it was irregular for the appeal chairperson to send the matter back for rehearing. I have considered the applicant’s contention and in my view there is no basis for a claim for procedural unfairness. As was explained by Trollip J in Tikly & others v Johannes NO & others 1963 (2) SA 588 (T) at 590F–591A [also reported at [1963] 3 All SA 91 (T) – Ed], an appeal usually falls into one of the following three categories: 
an appeal in the wide sense, that is, a complete re-hearing of, and fresh determination on the merits of the matter with or without additional evidence or information . . .;
an appeal in the ordinary strict sense, that is, a re-hearing on the merits but limited to the evidence or information on which the decision under appeal was given, and in which the only determination is whether that decision was right or wrong . . .;
a review, that is, a limited re-hearing with or without additional evidence or information to determine, not whether the decision under appeal was correct or not, but whether the arbiters had exercised their powers and discretion honestly and properly . . ."

 The applicant had complained that there were initial irregularities and this was the respondent’s way of trying to rectify it. I am, therefore, satisfied that what the company did was in line with the definition of appeal.

The evidence further showed that the applicant had attended the hearing but he refused to participate in the proceeding because he believed that it would not be fair. This is all speculative as the applicant could not provide me with convincing evidence to support this contention save to state that it would be unfair because the same people were going to present the case. The major difference though was that the appeal outcome was that it should be under the auspices of an independent chairperson. In the present case, it is clear that the respondent had offered the employee a second chance to defend himself against the allegations of misconduct which led to him being charged. The employee did not take the opportunity. The crucial question is whether his absence from the hearing was, in the circumstances of this case, justified; or, differently put, whether fairness to both parties demands that the outcome of guilty be set aside or not. I think not as the applicant had no plausible reason for not attending especially since he was the one who appealed the initial outcome. Then when he is 
[2010] JOL 25932 (MEIBC) at 4
 given the opportunity, he refuses. It would, therefore, be unfair for the respondent to be penalised for the deliberate refusal by the applicant to attend the hearing.
The applicant further alleged that the respondent had acted inconsistently. The respondent stated that this was an afterthought and that the applicant had not raised this previously. I have viewed the applicant’s appeal form and concur with the respondent that in his appeal form the applicant was concerned mainly with the procedure and the sanction. Even if this were the case, the applicant was given a second opportunity to raise the issue but he made the decision not take up the opportunity. I have, therefore, not been convinced by this contention. 
When the above is considered I have to concur with the respondent that the applicant has failed to discharge the onus showing that the disciplinary action taken against him was unfair.

[6]  .  Award

The case against the respondent is dismissed.

Appearance:
Mr Victor Mohlathe (R)


End of Document