



Makhubela / Brand South Africa [2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAJB25503-18
Date: 13/06/2019
Before: D Wilson, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — CEO suspended on full pay pending outcome of disciplinary action — Suspension both lawful and fair.
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — Employees not entitled to be heard before precautionary suspension on full pay.
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — What constitutes — “Special leave” granted pending disciplinary action amounting to suspension.

Editor’s Summary


After being placed on “special leave” for a month while allegations of misconduct against him were being investigated, the applicant, then the respondent’s chief executive officer, declined to agree to an extension of his leave. He was informed that the respondent had decided to suspend him pending the completion of disciplinary proceedings. The applicant claimed that his suspension was unlawful because only the Minister could suspend him and the board had not passed a resolution approving his suspension. The respondent contended that since the applicant had not claimed that he was suspended, the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to entertain the matter and denied that it has acted unfairly.

The Commissioner held that the applicant was de facto on suspension and that the CCMA had jurisdiction because he had been prevented from resuming duty after his special leave. The term “special leave” is a semantic device aimed at lessening the reputational impact of a precautionary suspension. However, precautionary leave and suspension both have the same objective – to keep the employee out of the workplace while an investigation is being conducted. 

The Commissioner held further that, although the respondent’s trust deed did not require ministerial approval for precautionary suspension, he was satisfied that the Minister had in fact approved the applicant’s special leave. It was unnecessary for the Minister to grant approval again when the special leave morphed into a suspension and the board was not required to issue new terms of suspension. Although the board had asked the applicant to make representations as to why he should not be suspended, this was unnecessary because such representations are not required. In any event, the applicant had declined to make representations.

As to the fairness of the suspension, the Commissioner noted that the applicant has suffered no prejudice because the suspension was on full pay. That he was unable to work was a necessary consequence of the suspension. The suspension was, accordingly, both lawful and fair.

The application was dismissed.

 
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1215

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of proceedings and representation
This arbitration hearing was held on 25 February and 27 May 2019 at the Johannesburg offices of the CCMA. The applicant, Dr Kingsley Makhubela, was represented by Mr Carlton Mogane, an attorney of the firm Moshoana Mabena Mogane Incorporated Attorneys. The respondent, Brand South Africa, a state-owned trust, was represented by Mr Dion Masher, an attorney of the firm Edward Nathan Sonnenbergs Incorporated Attorneys (ENS Africa). The hearing was held in English and was electronically recorded on the first day and digitally recorded on the second day. 
The applicant testified personally and submitted a bundle of documents, marked “A”, numbered from pages 1–99. The respondent called one witness and submitted a bundle of documents, marked “B”, numbered from pages 1–31. Both witnesses testified under oath. The parties submitted written closing arguments which were received on 3 June 2019.

The issue to be decided
The issue to be decided is whether the respondent committed an unfair labour practice in suspending (or purporting to suspend) the applicant. 

Background to the dispute
The applicant is employed as the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent, reporting to a Board of Trustees. Following certain allegations made against him, he consented to being placed on special leave from 20 April 2018 for a period of approximately a month while the allegations were investigated. After the expiry of a period of 30 days, he refused to consent to an extension of the special leave period, and the respondent then informed him on 5 June 2018 that the Board proposed to suspend him on full pay pending the convening and completion of a disciplinary hearing. The applicant maintained that due process was not followed in suspending him, and that there was therefore no lawful suspension.
Subsequent to this several charges were laid against the applicant; however the respondent chose to proceed only on the first charge of sexual harassment initially, with the other charges being put on hold. The applicant was found not guilty on the sexual harassment charge, and the remaining charges were amended and the applicant was not permitted to return to work. As at the date of completion of the arbitration hearing the disciplinary hearing on the additional charges was still continuing and the applicant has not returned to work.

Jurisdictional issue
Mr Masher questioned the jurisdiction of the CCMA to deal with the matter on the grounds that the applicant claimed that he was not suspended, and in that case the dispute did not fall under section 186(2)(b) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended (“the LRA”) and the  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1216
  CCMA did not have jurisdiction to arbitrate. Mr Mogane responded that the applicant’s case was that he wanted to return to work but was prevented from doing so. The respondent told him that he was on suspension, and this was covered by section 186(2)(b). I gave an ex tempore ruling that it appeared that there was at least a de facto suspension, and that this fell under the provisions of section 186(2)(b). The parties could lead evidence and argue about whether the suspension was unlawful and/or unfair.

Survey of evidence and argument
The following is a brief summary of the relevant evidence submitted by the applicant. It is not intended to be exhaustive; however I confirm that I have taken all of the evidence and arguments into account in reaching my decision.

Applicant’s case
Dr Kingsley Makhubela testified that he was appointed as CEO of the respondent from 1 August 2015, on a five-year contract. While he was in Australia in March 2018 he was summoned by the Chair and the Deputy Chair of the Board, who had informed him that there were allegations against him and that they had appointed a team of forensic investigators to investigate the allegations. He was required to hand in his computers.
Approximately three weeks later, on 6 April 2018 he was called by the Chair and the head of the Ethics Committee and told that he had been cleared of all allegations.
In 2017 he had investigated corruption in relation to a R45 million tender, which had been inflated by R10 million. He had cancelled the tender. The “successful” bidder had threatened to take him to court, but he had nevertheless re-advertised the tender. He had discovered that the existing service provider had been grossly overcharging them. The service provider had re-applied, but did not have all the required documentation to qualify to tender. He had discovered this in January 2018. While he was in Australia, people who were involved in the corruption made allegations against him of sexual harassment, watching pornography on company equipment, illegally employing a Chief Financial Officer, and promoting an employee on the basis of their sexual relationship. He was cleared of all of these allegations.
Subsequently the investigation was re-opened, and he had agreed to go on special leave from 20 April 2018 for approximately a month while the investigation took place. The allegations were the same as the previous ones. The respondent said that every effort would be made to conclude the investigation within a month, or else would consult with him regarding an extension of the special leave. 
On 20 May 2018 he wrote to the Deputy Chair of the Board stating that he wished to return to work on 21 May 2018 and requested his keys. She had responded on 24 May 2018 informing him that the investigation would be concluded on 28 May 2018 and the report would be considered by the Board on 29 May and discussed with him on 30 May 2018. There was no consultation with him regarding the extension of his special leave. 
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1217
The investigation had concluded that there was some merit in the sexual harassment allegations and the Board had decided that there should be a disciplinary process. However he was not informed of this immediately and on 1 June 2018 he wrote another letter to the Board, in which he expressed his concern and also noted that his request for a copy of the original investigation report, in which he had been cleared of all allegations, had not been met. 
In terms of the Trust Deed of the respondent, the Board was responsible for any disciplinary action against the CEO, with the concurrence of the Executive Authority (which in this case was the Minister of Communications). 
On 5 June 2018 the Board had responded to him, informing him of the intention to take disciplinary action against him on a charge of sexual harassment. He was also informed that if he was not prepared to agree to the extension of his special leave pending such disciplinary action, the Board proposed to suspend him on full pay. His attorneys had advised the Board on 7 June that he would not agree to extend the special leave and that they were free to suspend him if they so wished, within the parameters of the law. 
The Board had offered him an opportunity to make representations as to why he should not be suspended, but he had declined as he was not in a position to do so. The Board could not suspend him without the concurrence of the Minister. They needed to pass a Board Resolution and serve him with a letter of suspension, which did not happen. He had written to the Minister to clarify his status, and her response made it clear that she had given consent for his suspension only on the sexual harassment charge.
On 18 June 2018 he was served with the notice of disciplinary hearing dated 14 June 2018, for the sexual harassment charge. Subsequently additional charges were added; one alleging that he made an intimidating and threatening comment to Ms Babalwa Ngonyama (the Deputy Chair of the Board), and one alleging that he breached the terms of his special leave and / or suspension. 
The hearing commenced on 16 July 2018 and continued on 1 and 2 August 2018. On 3 August the Board had decided to add a further charge of conflict of interest. However it was decided that the hearing would proceed on the charge of sexual harassment only, and that the further three charges would only be considered if the applicant was acquitted on the sexual harassment charge. His attorney had an objection to the separation of the charges, but the matter proceeded on this basis. 
On 5 October 2018 he was informed that he had been found not guilty on the sexual harassment charge. However the respondent informed him that he would remain on paid suspension until further notice. The letter stated that the terms of his suspension would continue to apply but, as there had been no suspension letter, there were no terms of suspension. 
Dr Makhubela alleged that the Board had abused its authority, and that due process was not followed in suspending him. There was no Board Resolution or suspension letter, and no concurrence from the Minister for his continued suspension.  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1218
On 3 December 2018 he was informed in writing that the investigation into the additional charges was still on-going and that he remained on precautionary suspension since the Board had a reasonable apprehension that his presence at work could hamper or prejudice the investigation. He stated that he was not a threat to anyone except those involved in corrupt activities. 
Under cross-examination Dr Makhubela stated that he was unfairly kept away from work without being properly suspended. The purported suspension was illegal as it was not done within the framework of the law. The Minister had only given her concurrence to the special leave in relation to the sexual harassment charge, but had not given concurrence for suspension. 
It was put to Dr Makhubela that the Trust Deed, in requiring the concurrence of the Executive Authority, referred only to disciplinary action and dismissal and not suspension. Dr Makhubela responded that suspension was a part of the disciplinary process. 
He had agreed to the special leave to allow an investigation to take place without any suspicion of interference by himself. He agreed that there was a difference between an investigation and disciplinary action, but disagreed that there was no need for concurrence for suspension while an investigation took place. 
Dr Makhubela stated that he could not report for work on 21 May 2018 as he did not have his keys. The same applied to 1 June 2018. His attorney had responded to the respondent’s letter in which it proposed to suspend him by informing the respondent that he would return to work on 11 June 2019. He had gone to the office on that day but it was locked and he did not have a key. He did not attempt to report for work after that. The respondent had made its position clear; they were not willing to give him access. He had not agreed to extend the special leave and he was not legally suspended. He was unaware of any terms and conditions of suspension. It was put to him that the terms applicable to his special leave had continued to apply; Dr Makhubela replied that he had never agreed to that. 
Dr Makhubela agreed that he had been on Power FM (radio) and appeared on ENCA (television), claiming that he was not suspended and was being unlawfully prevented from going to work. He stated that wrong information was being fed to the media. Mr Masher showed a YouTube video of the ENCA interview in which Dr Makhubela stated that he was not suspended, accused the Board Chairperson of lying and alleged corruption at the respondent. Dr Makhubela stated that the Board Chairperson had alleged that he had signed a letter of suspension which she had at home, which was a lie. 
Dr Makhubela agreed that he had been paid throughout the period that he had not been at work.
Under re-examination Dr Makhubela stated that the respondent had claimed that the Minister had given her concurrence in a confidential letter addressed to the Board in April 2018, but despite a request, he had never seen this letter. 
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1219

Respondent’s case
Mr Stavros Nicolaou testified that he was a Trustee on the Board of the respondent and chaired the Human Resources, Remuneration, Social and Ethics Committee (known as RemCom). He and the Deputy chair had met with the applicant regarding the request that he take special leave, and the terms of the special leave were set out in the respondent’s letter dated 20 April 2018. This had occurred after whistle-blower reports were received. The respondent needed to investigate the allegations in the absence of the applicant, and had felt that special leave would be more palatable than suspension but would achieve the same objectives. There was no defined period for the investigation but on the applicant’s insistence they had included in the letter a statement that it would take approximately one month. The investigation only commenced on 23 April and concluded on 28 May 2018, which was within the parameters of “approximately one month”, particularly given that there were a number of public holidays within the period. From the Board’s point of view it was very clear that the special leave would endure until the completion of the investigation.
On 5 June 2018, the applicant was informed of the outcome of the investigation. They discovered that notwithstanding the terms of the special leave, the applicant had contacted a staff member (Menzi Simelane). The Board had proposed suspension if the applicant was not prepared to agree to the extension of the special leave, which he was not prepared to do. After receiving the letter dated 7 June 2018 from the applicant’s attorneys confirming this, the Board had decided to suspend the applicant.
Mr Nicolaou referred to the concurrence letter from the Minister dated 18 April 2018 (handed in by the respondent’s representative at the start of Mr Nicolaou’s evidence) which referred in the heading to “special leave”, but also contained the following, under point 5: “Upon placing the CEO on suspension, kindly provide my office with a copy of the suspension letter to enable me to inform Parliament”. The Board had to seek concurrence to take disciplinary action against the CEO, and the Board was of the view that it also required concurrence for the proposed special leave. The Minister’s letter referred to “suspension” because the Board had conveyed to her that on the expiry of the special leave it might have to suspend the applicant. The letter of 20 April setting out the terms of the special leave was sent to the Minister.
Following the letter of 5 June 2018 there was no further suspension letter. They could not let the applicant return to work while the disciplinary action was pending. After the outcome of the first disciplinary hearing the applicant was informed (on 5 October 2018) that he would remain on paid suspension. After 11 June 2018 the applicant never attempted to return to work; the Board’s view was that this was because he was suspended, on the same terms as his special leave. 
Under cross-examination Mr Nicolaou stated that it was irrelevant whether the applicant was placed on special leave or suspended; the important thing was that he be kept out of the workplace to safeguard the integrity and objectivity of the investigation. Special leave appeared more palatable  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1220
  to the public. He agreed that the employee’s consent was required for this. The respondent did not regard the special leave as being any different from suspension. The suspension was ultimately on the same terms as the special leave. The original special leave letter did not refer to a period but after input from the applicant, on the advice of his attorneys, they had agreed to amend the letter to refer to a period of approximately one month. The applicant had wanted to specify four weeks but they had said that it was impossible to predict exactly how long the investigation would take. If the period of special leave was to expire on 20 May 2018 the latter would have stated this. It was not necessary to consult with the applicant regarding an extension of the special leave because the investigation was completed within “approximately one month”. 
It had become urgent for the respondent to consider the sexual harassment charge first, as it was Women’s Month and there was growing sensitivity over women and child abuse. He was not sure if there was a Board Resolution detailing the specific charges. 
Mr Nicolaou stated that the precautionary suspension started from 29 May 2018, when the preliminary investigation was completed. The respondent then needed to move to a full investigation. Whether it was called special leave or suspension was irrelevant. The special leave ended on 29 May 2018, and thereafter it was a precautionary suspension. As CEO the applicant was aware that good governance required him to be absent from the office while the investigation continued. It would not have been reasonable to allow the applicant to return to work pending a final decision on suspension. He had already transgressed the terms of the special leave, which confirmed that the respondent was justified in not allowing him to return. 
Mr Nicolaou agreed that the Minister’s concurrence was required for the suspension of the applicant. Her letter of concurrence referred to “suspension”. He agreed that the letter of 20 April 2018 that was sent to the Minister referred only to special leave, not suspension, but effectively they were the same thing. 
Under re-examination Mr Nicolaou stated that the respondent’s letter of 5 June 2018 appeared to contradict his view that the precautionary suspension started from 29 May 2018. His view was that the special leave finished on 28 May 2018.

Closing arguments
The parties submitted written closing arguments which form part of the record and will not be repeated herein except as may be required in the analysis below.

Analysis of evidence and argument
The applicant’s case was in essence that he had agreed to being placed on special leave for a period of a month, but once this expired he was not properly and lawfully suspended, in that the concurrence of the Minister to his suspension was not obtained, there was no board resolution, no suspension letter was issued and no terms and conditions were set.  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1221
The respondent argued that the applicant needed to establish facts that showed that the CCMA had jurisdiction to arbitrate, by proving that there was a suspension. The applicant was adamant that he was not suspended and therefore the CCMA did not have jurisdiction to arbitrate. I rejected this argument at the commencement of the arbitration and I reject it again. Although the applicant did state on several occasions that he was not suspended, it is clear to me that his meaning was simply that his suspension was unprocedural and unlawful. It is equally clear that he was prevented from resuming his duties by the respondent, which effectively amounts to a suspension. Thirdly, the respondent acknowledges that the applicant was suspended, and this is stated in writing in the letter of 5 October 2018. I am satisfied that the CCMA has jurisdiction to consider the fairness of the suspension. 
The first issue in dispute is when the special leave came to an end. The applicant maintains it came to an end on 20 May, after the expiry of a period of 30 days. respondent’s view, as per Mr Nicolaou, is that it came to an end on 28 May 2018 when the preliminary investigation was completed. I believe that the latter view is somewhat more correct, if not entirely so. The respondent’s letter of 20 April 2018 refers to “an approximate period of one month”, and nowhere is a defined period of 30 days mentioned. I am satisfied that the period from 20 April to 28 May 2018 falls reasonably within the ambit of the phrase “approximately one month”. 
When cross-examined the respondent’s witness was somewhat confused as to when the precautionary suspension started. He stated that the special leave came to an end on 28 May 2018 and the precautionary suspension started on 5 June 2018, when the letter proposing suspension was issued. He could not readily explain what the situation was between those two dates, finally coming to the conclusion that it was “precautionary suspension”, and after 5 June it was “full suspension”. However the term “precautionary suspension” refers to any period of suspension on full pay implemented during an investigation or prior to pending disciplinary action. Regardless of this, I do not find this to be significant. In essence, there is little difference between special leave and suspension. If one has regard to the terms of the special leave, they were the normal terms applicable during a precautionary suspension. Had the applicant not agreed to the special leave, I have no doubt that he would have been formally suspended. The terminology of “special leave” is mere semantics, aimed at lessening the reputational impact associated with suspension. The objective of both special leave and precautionary suspension is the same, that is, to keep the employee away from the workplace and to avoid possible prejudice to the investigation through interference with witnesses, removal or destruction of evidence, etc. 
Having found that the applicant was in fact suspended, I now need to consider whether the suspension was fair. I will deal firstly with the lawfulness of the suspension, since the applicant argued that the suspension was unlawful and hence unfair. Despite the evidence of Mr Nicolaou that the Board deemed it necessary to obtain the concurrence of the Minister to suspend the applicant (or to place him on special leave), I tend to agree with the argument of Mr Masher that the Trust Deed does not require this.  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1222

  In respect of concurrence, the Trust Deed refers only to discipline and dismissal, and precautionary suspension is different from both of these. In any event, I am satisfied that the Minister gave her approval for the placing of the applicant on special leave, and it is clear from her letter that she too regarded special leave and suspension as one and the same. It was not necessary for the Board to seek further concurrence once the special leave morphed into a precautionary suspension. It was equally unnecessary for the Board to issue new terms of suspension; the applicant remained out of the workplace, and it must have been clear that the terms set for the special leave would continue to apply. 

The respondent’s letter of 5 June 2018 proposed suspension (in the event that the applicant did not agree to extend the special leave) and requested representations from the applicant why he should not be suspended. The applicant did not make any representations, and in any event this is not a requirement in terms of the Constitutional Court decision in Long v South African Breweries (Pty) Ltd and others 2019 (5) BCLR 609 (CC) [also reported at [2019] 6 BLLR 515 (CC) – Ed], where the Court stated as follows: 

 “[24] In respect of the merits, the Labour Court’s finding that an employer is not required to give an employee an opportunity to make representations prior to a precautionary suspension, cannot be faulted. As the Labour Court correctly stated, the suspension imposed on the applicant was a precautionary measure, not a disciplinary one. … Consequently, the requirements relating to fair disciplinary action under the LRA cannot find application. Where the suspension is precautionary and not punitive, there is no requirement to afford the employee an opportunity to make representations”.

In the absence of such representations, the proposal to suspend the applicant would logically come into effect. It was not necessary for a further suspension letter to be issued; there were pre-existing terms already in place. I am also satisfied that the Board had properly authorised the suspension by way of a resolution. The fact that this initially related to the investigation of the sexual harassment charges does not invalidate the suspension once those charges were disposed of. The suspension was lawfully in place and it was up to the Board to decide when the suspension would be lifted, based on the charges still pending against the applicant.
I am, accordingly, satisfied that the suspension of the applicant was lawful, and I must now determine whether it was fair. This is the essence of the dispute, since it was referred as an unfair labour practice dispute. In this regard Mr Masher quoted extensively from the Long v South African Breweries case (supra). In that case the Court approved the finding of the Labour Court that the fairness of a suspension is determined by assessing first, whether there is a fair reason for suspension and, secondly, whether it prejudices the employee. The Court held that where a suspension was implemented in order for an investigation to take place, the finding that this was a fair reason could not be faulted. Furthermore the Court held that where the suspension was on full pay, cognisable prejudice would be ameliorated. 
It was common cause that the applicant’s special leave and subsequent suspension was and is on full pay. In terms of the case law quoted above, this implies that the applicant is not prejudiced by the suspension. The applicant argued that he suffered prejudice through damage to his reputation, prospects  
[2019] 11 BALR 1214 (CCMA) at 1223
  of advancement and fulfilment. There is no damage to the applicant’s reputation as a result of legitimate suspension; this will only occur if he is found guilty of any of the charges against him. As far as prospects of advancement are concerned, the applicant is already the CEO of the organisation, and it is difficult to imagine there could be any prospects of further advancement within the organisation. While he may suffer a lack of fulfilment through being unable to work, this is a necessary and unavoidable consequence of the suspension and cannot on its own render the suspension unfair.
Turning to the question of a fair reason, it was common cause that the initial special leave was put in place to allow an investigation to take place. The outcome of that investigation was that sexual harassment charges should be laid, and this was subsequently done. It was clearly fair for the suspension to continue pending the disciplinary hearing. However before the hearing on those charges was concluded, there were further charges laid. These were put on hold, as it were, pending the outcome of the first hearing. The respondent then elected to proceed with the secondary charges, and that hearing is currently (or recently was) still under way. 
It is clear that the applicant’s suspension has been in place as a result of an investigation (or several investigations) and the serious charges and disciplinary processes which flowed from those investigations. Thus on the face of it there is a fair reason for the precautionary suspension. I have considered whether the lengthy period of suspension can be regarded as leading to the suspension being unfair. Although it appears that the respondent has not acted with the expedition that would normally be desirable in bringing a disciplinary process to a conclusion, and as it was exhorted to do by the Minister, in the light of the Constitutional Court decision in the Long v South African Breweries case (supra), I cannot find that this has prejudiced the applicant, who has remained on full pay throughout. It is rather the South African taxpayer who has suffered prejudice through the lengthy delays. 
In summary, I find that the applicant was lawfully suspended, and the suspension was for a fair reason and did not prejudice the applicant. The applicant has not discharged the onus of proving that the respondent committed an unfair labour practice related to suspension.
In his closing argument the applicant requested that I should order the respondent to furnish the applicant with a copy of the final investigation report. I do not regard this as being part of this unfair labour practice dispute, and do not believe that I have jurisdiction to make such an order, even if I believed it to be appropriate.

Award
The respondent, Brand South Africa, did not commit an unfair labour practice in suspending the applicant, Dr Kingsley Makhubela.
The applicant’s referral of an unfair labour practice dispute is dismissed.

The following case was referred to in the above award:


End of Document