



Chubb Guarding SA (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & others [2006] JOL 17124 (LC)
Judgments Online

Division: Johannesburg
Case No: JR 2377 / 03
Hearing Date(s): 24 / 03 / 2006
Judgment Date(s): 31 / 03 / 2006
Bench: Francis J


Keywords


Labour law — Practice and procedure — Referral of dispute — Categorisation of dispute — Arbitration award — Review 

Mini Summary


The applicant sought to have an arbitration award reviewed and set aside. The award directed the applicant to pay the third respondent his lost salary for 6 months, on the ground that the applicant had committed an unfair labour practice. 

Held that the terms in which the third respondent's referral was couched restricted the dispute to one relating to an unfair labour practice. The court pointed to the narrow ambit of that concept in the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995. The conduct complained of in the referral did not amount to an unfair labour practice as statutorily defined. Thus, the arbitrator was wrong in his findings. The award was reviewed and set aside.

 
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 1

FRANCIS J:

Introduction

[1]    This is an application to review and set aside an arbitration award made by the second respondent (the commissioner) in terms of which the commissioner found that the applicant committed an unfair labour practice. The applicant was ordered to pay the third respondent his lost salary for six months that amounted to R8 322.

[2]    The application was opposed by the third respondent.

Background facts

[3]    It is common cause that the third respondent commenced his employment with the applicant on 12 April 2001 as a grade "D" security guard. Firearms appeared to have been stolen at  
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 2
a site called Cloverdin on 24 January 2003. On that day the third respondent was doing duties with two security guards, Madonsela and Sithebe at the Boksburg Post Office. He recorded his name and company number in the occurrence book. His name does not appear in the occurrence book of Cloverdin and he did not work there on that day. The following Tuesday he went to see the area manager who on his arrival closed the door and questioned him about the whereabouts of the stolen firearms. He told the area manager that he should have asked him about his whereabouts on 24 January 2003. The third respondent was told that he would have to undergo a polygraph test and should he refuse to do so he would be arrested or dismissed. The polygraph test was done on him. The next day he returned for the results of the polygraph test but was ignored by everybody. He remained there for the day and was not informed what the outcome of the test was. He reported for work the next day and was not booked on the instructions of the area manager, one Willemse, who said that he should not be booked till after the criminal case. He was verbally summoned to a disciplinary hearing that did not take place. The applicant stopped both his booking and salary payment.

[4]    The third respondent consulted his shop steward on 28 January 2003 and found two members of the SAPS who arrested him. He was taken to the Boksburg Post Office to verify that he reported there for duty on 24 January 2003. They saw the occurrence book entries that showed that he worked there on that day. His house was searched but nothing was found. He was taken to Cloverdin where the occurrence book was examined. His name was not reflected in the occurrence book for that day. Despite this, he was arrested. He spent months in jail and was acquitted on 22 July 2003 and reported for duty on 23 July 2003. One Marcus  
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 3
promised that the applicant would pay him his lost salary of R8 322 later that day. A Wayne offered him a month's salary of R1 387 that he rejected.

[5]    The third respondent referred an unfair labour practice dispute to the CCMA for conciliation and then to arbitration. The third respondent was the only witness who testified at the arbitration proceedings.

The arbitration award

[6]    The commissioner in analysing the evidence that was led found that the third respondent was accused of "criminal proceedings" instead of holding a hearing for him. This was unfair, as it was not according to a fair procedure. As far as substance was concerned, the commissioner found that the third respondent was arrested for no reason. No evidence was presented to prove his involvement in the alleged offence. He lost his earnings unduly and unfairly. An unfair labour practice was committed and the third respondent deserved the payment that was due to him. He committed no offence.

[7]    The commissioner found that an unfair labour practice was committed and ordered that the third respondent be paid six months of his lost salary amounting to R8 322 payable within five days of service of the award.

The grounds of review

[8]    The applicant brought a review application and contended that the award is reviewable on  
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 4
the basis of section 145(2)(a)(ii) of the Act in that the commissioner committed a gross irregularity, particularly, but not exclusively, in the following respects:

Ignoring the applicant's submission that they had no control over the SAPS and action taken by them after laying a criminal charge against the third respondent.
Finding that the applicant committed an unfair labour practice while there were no grounds for such a finding.
Ignoring the submission by the applicant that the third respondent's claim lies with the State, and that his remedy lies in a damages claim.
Ignoring the applicant's submission that the third respondent was reinstated on 4 August 2003.
The commissioner would not have come to the conclusion that:
an unfair labour practice was committed if the commissioner evaluated the evidence presented to him.
The commissioner committed a gross irregularity as envisaged in section 145(2)(a)(ii) of the Act in finding that an unfair labour practice was committed.

Analysis of the facts and arguments raised

[9]    The third respondent had referred an unfair labour practice dispute to the CCMA on 19 August 2003. In the referral the dispute was described as an unfair labour practice dispute. In the certificate of outcome issued it was described as "Alleged unfair conduct relating to promotion/demotion/probation/training/benefits". The commissioner recorded in his arbitration award that the issue for determination was "whether the employer committed  
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 5
unfair labour practice by initiating the applicant's [third respondent's] arrest and on acquittal, reinstated him but failed to pay the lost earnings".

[10]    Section 186(2) of the Act defines an unfair labour practice to mean:

"any . . . omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving-

the unfair conduct of the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary dismissal in respect of an employee;
the failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act 2000 (Act 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure as defined in the Act."

[11]    It is clear from the definition of an unfair labour practice in the Act that it is much narrower than the previous definition in the old Labour Relations Act. The CCMA has jurisdiction to entertain an unfair labour practice dispute that falls within the definition of the Act. Ms B Tolmay, who appeared for the third respondent, conceded that the unfair labour practice dispute does not relate to benefits and is not in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Act. She contended that it fell within the provisions of section 186(2)(b). I do not agree that it falls  
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 6
within section 186(2)(b) of the Act. The third respondent was not suspended nor was he charged with any act of misconduct. It might be argued that by failing to pay him his salary and not giving him any work before he was arrested that he was suspended. However, this was not how the unfair labour practice dispute was couched and referred to the CCMA for arbitration. It is not necessary for me to express any view in this regard. The commissioner summarised in her award what the issue was that she was required to decide. The certificate suggests that the dispute was one that falls under section 186(2)(a) of the Act.

[12]    Since this is a review application, the court must confine itself to the material placed before the commissioner. It was not contended before the commissioner that the dispute falls under the broader constitutional guarantee of fair labour practices. There is also no counter review application filed by the third respondent. The third respondent does have civil remedies available to him.

[13]    While I accept that the third respondent was treated unfairly by the applicant, it was not proven before the commissioner that an unfair labour practice was committed against him. It would appear that the third respondent is entitled to be paid his salary for January 2003.

[14]    The commissioner in finding that an unfair labour practice was committed, committed a reviewable irregularity and exceeded his powers as contemplated by section 145(2)(a)(iii) of the Act. The award stands to be reviewed and set aside in its entirety.

 
[2006] JOL 17124 (LC) at 7

[15]    I do not believe that this is a matter where costs should follow the result. I have taken into account the fact that the third respondent is an employee of the applicant and that he was treated unfairly. An appropriate order is not to award any costs.

[16]    In the circumstances I make the following order:

The arbitration award dated 22 October 2003 under case number GA 28743/03 issued by the commissioner is reviewed and set aside.
There is no order as to costs.
Appearance:
Adv P Buirsky, Calitz Crockart & Associates (At); Adv E Tolmay, Allardyce & Partners (3R)


End of Document