



Ramsammy v Wholesale & Retail Sector Education & Training Authority [2009] JOL 23511 (LC)
Judgments Online

Division: Johannesburg
Case No: JS 836 / 07
Hearing Date(s): 11–13 / 11 / 2008, 09–13 / 02 / 2009
Judgment Date(s): 20 / 03 / 2009
Bench: U Bhoola AJ


Keywords


Labour law — Dismissal — Protected disclosure — Applicability — Onus of proof

Mini Summary


Alleging that his dismissal was automatically unfair in terms of section 187(1)(h) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, the applicant contended that his dismissal constituted an occupational detriment on account of his having made a protected disclosure under the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 (the "PDA").

Held that at the present stage, the court was required to consider only the question of whether or not the applicant had made a protected disclosure in terms of the PDA.

The applicant bore the onus of proving that his disclosures were protected by the PDA. For a protected disclosure to the employer, the applicant must also show that it was made in good faith and substantially in accordance with any prescribed or authorised procedure for the reporting of the impropriety, or to the employer where there is no such procedure.

The court found that the applicant's disclosures were not based on any proper evidence, and that he had relied on mere speculation. He therefore could not rely on the protection of the PDA.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 1




Introduction

[1]    This is the preliminary stage of proceedings in which the applicant challenges his dismissal as constituting an automatically unfair dismissal in terms of section 187(1)(h) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995. The applicant contends that his dismissal constitutes an occupational detriment on account of his having made a protected disclosure under the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 ("the PDA").

[2]    The parties agreed in pre-trial proceedings that the matter should proceed in two stages. In this first stage, having heard relevant evidence, the court is required to consider only the question of whether or not the applicant made one or more protected disclosures in terms of the PDA.

The material facts

[3]    The applicant was employed by the respondent as a skills advisor in January 2002. In June 2004 he applied for and was appointed to the position of Executive Skills Development Manager. He was dismissed on 26 September 2007.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 2

[4]    In March 2005 an article was published in the Enterprise magazine. The article was entitled "Woman power". It reflected, inter alia, that Ms Ntombi Dludla ("Dludla"), held a BA degree in Industrial Psychology & Communication Science from UNISA, was a "member of the management team" of the respondent, and that she had previously been employed by FABCOS Development Services.

[5]    The article incorrectly stated that Dludla had a BA degree. In fact, she had two outstanding modules to complete. She completed these in 2006 when the BA degree was conferred on her.

[6]    The article was published in March 2005 but Dludla had only been appointed Executive Manager from with effect from 1 April 2005.

[7]    As the time of publication Dludla was employed by the respondent in the dual capacity of Board Secretariat/Human Resources Officer, having commenced employment on a short-term contract as Board Secretariat from March to August 2003. On 1 September 2003 she was appointed Board Secretariat on a full-time basis, after being interviewed by the Executive Committee ("Exco") of the respondent's Board. Dludla's initial appointment had been made by the Chief Executive Officer ("CEO") of the respondent, Mr Joel Dikgole ("Dikgole"), and had been approved by the Board. It had been customary at the time for appointments to be made without following any particular procedure and the applicant had himself engaged contract employees in a similar manner. Thereafter, on 30 March 2005 the Board's remuneration committee recommended Dludla's promotion to Executive Manager: Human Resources with effect from 1 April. This recommendation was approved by the Exco on 31 March 2005.

[8]    The respondent's Annual Report for the period ending 31 March 2005 described Dludla as the Executive Manager: Human Resources even though her appointment only came into effect in the following reporting period.

[9]    From April 2006 onwards, a number of Executive Managers in the employ of the respondent, including the applicant, raised concerns about various human resource and other issues ("the HR issues") they were disgruntled about. One of these was described as "preferential treatment" and overlapped to some extent with the applicant's concerns about Dludla's advancement.

[10]    In July 2006 the applicant obtained a copy of Dludla's academic transcript from the University of South Africa ("UNISA"). It reflected that in May 2003 she had six modules outstanding, and in April 2004 she had four modules outstanding towards completion of her BA degree.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 3

[11]    The applicant obtained a copy of the Enterprise article from Ms Polly Modikoe ("Modikoe"), the Executive Manager of the respondent's Marketing & Communications Division. Furthermore, Modikoe provided the applicant with a copy of the CEO's profile, which confirmed that he had worked at FABCOS. She moreover informed the applicant that Dludla had written the article, and that when he was shown the article by Dludla the CEO seemed surprised by Dludla's qualifications. The parties agreed that Modikoe's evidence is common cause for the purposes of these proceedings, irrespective of its hearsay content.

[12]    On 17 July 2006 the applicant made a disclosure to his employer ("the internal disclosure"). This was in the form of an e-mail to the CEO, which stated as follows:

"Dear Joel

I would like to bring the following to your attention:

In March 2005 in the Enterprise Magazine there appeared an article about Ntombi and the W&RSETA. Ntombi relied (sic) her qualifications and work experience amongst other information. It is now alleged Ntombi's qualifications as per Enterprise Magazine is (sic) not true and correct.
In addition there is (sic) link between Ntombi and yourself in your previous working company.

Of concern is the following with brief implications:

The submission of an alleged Fraudulent C. V. and in addition to announcing it publically (sic) professional and criminal misconduct.
Your knowledge of the falsifying of information in the CV.
Your relationship with Ntombi prior to her joining the SETA.
Current job description of Ntombi – strategic in nature.
Lack of advertising, lack of interviews etc – contravention of the HR policy.
Validity of staff recruitment and the restructuring process.
Favouritism, nepotism, Jobs for Pals is a serious offence.
Being and (sic) assessory (sic) to a fraudulent activity is a criminal offence.
SETA's is (sic) regulated by the SAQA – promoting recognized qualifications.
The W&RSETA made headlines with the previous CEO's fraudulent CV – Reputational Risk.
Bringing the Organisation into disrepute – media implications.
Reporting the matter to the Board and other.
Other.

The above allegations can be fully supported by documentary evidence and witnesses statements.

With regards to the way forward: This matter will be personally discussed with you.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 4

Regards

Sagie Ramsammy."

[13]    The CEO appointed the Chief Financial Officer of the respondent, Dr Hennie Zwarts, and the Chief Operating Officer, Ms Daphne Matloa, to investigate the allegations ("the 2C investigation"). The investigation commenced on 2 August 2006.

[14]    On 15 September 2006, directly after the 2C investigation had resumed, the applicant circulated his internal disclosure in the e-mail of 17 July to all the Directors and Executive Managers of the respondent. On the same day he made three external disclosures, to the Public Protector ("PP"), Special Investigations Unit ("SIU") and the Department of Labour ("DOL"). The external disclosures are broadly stated as being that the CEO had engaged in "fraud/mismanagement" or "fraud/misadministration".

[15]    The respondent appointed a Board committee to conduct a further investigation, ie "the Exco investigation". It is also common cause that the applicant was subsequently charged with, inter alia, insolence and allegations of fraud against the CEO and dismissed in 2007.

The applicant's evidence

[16]    The applicant made four disclosures, the internal one by email to the CEO of 17 July 2006 ("the 17 July e-mail"), and three external disclosures to the PP, SIU and DOL on 15 September 2006.

[17]    The applicant testified that he had read the Enterprise article when it first appeared in 2005, but did not notice anything untoward. However, in June or early July 2006, approximately 15 months after the article was published, he received an anonymous telephone call while at work, from a woman who informed him that Dludla's qualifications in the article were incorrect in that she did not have a BA degree. The caller also informed him that Dikgole and Dludla had previously worked together at FABCOS. The caller had refused to provide her details but noted the applicant's details and promised to revert to him. The call had not been put through to him specifically and he had simply answered a telephone in the department and had spoken directly to the caller. He explained that calls of a serious nature would normally be put through to the any of the nine members of the executive management team if none of the members of senior management (the CEO, Chief Financial Officer or Chief Operating Officer) were available. He was unable to explain why he did not inform Exco about the telephone call, despite the fact that he had received it during the currency of its investigation of his disclosures.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 5

[18]    After the anonymous telephone call the applicant decided to conduct his own investigation and approached a colleague, Ms Mashikwane Malebye ("Malebye"), the respondent's Human Resources Officer, to request Dludla's curriculum vitae ("CV"). She informed him that Dludla's CV was missing from her personnel file but that she had seen it on a previous occasion and that it reflected Dludla as having a BA degree.

[19]    The applicant also requested a copy of the article from Modikoe, which she provided to him a few days thereafter. He did not inform Modikoe about the anonymous telephone call but gave her a vague reason for requiring the article.

[20]    In order to establish who had written the article the applicant approached Mr Lebogang Khoza ("Khoza"), who was named as the contact person in the article. Khoza was employed in the Marketing & Communications Division of the respondent. He said that he had not written the article. He also informed the applicant that there had been other telephonic queries about the article and specifically about Dludla's qualifications. The applicant requested written confirmation that Khoza was not the writer and the latter obliged with an e-mail to the applicant to this effect.

[21]    The applicant testified that the substance of his disclosure was the CEO's complicity in the fraudulent CV in order to secure Dludla's promotion as executive manager. He characterised this as "recruitment fraud". He did not intend his e-mail to constitute a protected disclosure, and had made it in the "ordinary course" of his employment and in terms of the respondent's human resources policy. He had raised the issues confidentially with the CEO in accordance with "procedure and protocol", and he considered his complaint to have been made against the CEO and not Dludla.

[22]    The applicant testified that the reason he referred in his e-mail of 17 July to the "alleged" fraudulent CV was because he had not seen it and "was not totally convinced that it was fraudulent".

[23]    In regard to the academic transcript the applicant testified about the existence of a Memorandum of Agreement between UNISA and the respondent in terms of which UNISA undertook to co-operate with the respondent in respect of queries relating to academic information. In cross–examination, however, he conceded that no such agreement existed.

[24]    The applicant's reason for not co-operating with the Exco investigation was that members of Exco had been implicated in allegations concerning financial  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 6
mismanagement arising from a capacity building project ("CBP") for shop stewards, which made him wary of their impartiality and independence.

[25]    In the applicant's disclosure to the Public Protector, he stated that "[t]he CEO at the W&RSETA is involved in Fraud/Misadministration". He testified that in formulating the complaint he relied on the terminology on the Public Protector's website which reflected its areas of jurisdiction. His complaint states that "[d]ue to security reasons more information, documentation, evidence, witness statements etc will be provided on request". When he was asked in cross-examination why his allegation was not substantiated it emerged for the first time that he was concerned that the CEO would access his e-mail communications. He was unable to explain why, if this was a legitimate concern, he had not taken appropriate steps to safeguard his privacy or had not forwarded supporting information separately from the complaint form. It is common cause that he received no response from the Public Protector to his disclosure.

[26]    The applicant was challenged in cross-examination about the external disclosures being vague and therefore incapable of constituting "information". He testified that the substance of his external disclosures was the same as his e-mail of 17 July, the contents of which should be incorporated into them. He also introduced in cross-examination, for the first time, the financial mismanagement of the CBP.

[27]    The applicant testified that his motivation for making the external disclosures was that he was "not winning" before the 2C investigation, and he accordingly decided not to participate when the investigation reconvened on 15 September 2006. He had been under the impression that the 2Cs would share with him information they had uncovered in the investigation, and he became annoyed that he was being asked to provide them with information to substantiate his disclosure. He was concerned that their report would be submitted to the Board without him having had sight of it. He perceived the 2Cs to be biased, and his explanation for not co-operating with the Exco investigation was the involvement of Exco members in the CBP (however, he subsequently conceded that he had been correct in regard to only one Exco member), and furthermore that he feared self-incrimination. The basis for his fear of self-incrimination was that a former colleague, Mr Mokotedi, had been dismissed for submitting a dossier implicating the respondent in various improprieties to the Department of Labour. He conceded, however, that Mokotedi's dismissal had followed charges related to a serious conflict of interest and had not been linked to his disclosures. The applicant was furthermore unable to explain why he failed to apply for the recusal of Mr Mausam, the disciplinary enquiry chair who was appointed after the first chair had recused herself. He presented contradictory versions on this issue in that  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 7
he initially claimed Mausam insisted that he would hear the matter irrespective of the applicant's objections, and then confirmed that he continued to participate because he believed he would get a fair hearing. However, despite this belief he did not lead evidence at the disciplinary enquiry.

The respondent's evidence

[28]    The respondent led the evidence of Malebye and Khoza.

[29]    Malebye denied that she had ever discussed Dludla or her CV with the applicant. She denied that they had a "close relationship" and disputed the applicant's evidence that they lived in the same area and discussed their common traffic frustrations (which version he subsequently changed). She had never agreed to assist the applicant with his investigation, and moreover was bound by a confidentiality agreement and had no access to personnel files. She had assisted with an audit of the personnel files of respondent's employees in 2006, and testified that if Dludla's CV had been missing from her file she would have informed Dludla accordingly. Malebye said she was not particularly interested in the events involving the applicant and preferred to focus on her work responsibilities instead.

[30]    Khoza's evidence was that the applicant had approached him on 6 October 2006 to enquire whether he had written the Enterprise magazine article. Khoza stated that he was only the contact person cited in the article for queries and confirmed this in an e-mail to the applicant the same day. He had no other interaction with the applicant in this regard. He denied informing the applicant that he had received other queries in relation to the article. He disputed the applicant's version that he had not been called as a witness to applicant's disciplinary enquiry to protect him from victimisation and testified that he had agreed to give evidence but was never called, and if he feared victimisation he would not have written the e-mail to the applicant in the first place. In cross-examination the applicant had testified that Khoza had sent him e-mail confirmation that he was not the writer of the article on the same day as their discussion, ie 10 June 2006. He conceded in cross-examination, however, that the date recorded in the email, ie 6 October 2006, was the correct date on which their interaction occurred. He added, however, that he had also asked Khoza to confirm what Khoza had said about receiving other queries regarding the article. The applicant had difficulty explaining why, if Khoza had informed him about other queries, he had not asked for this to be recorded in the e-mail.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 8

The Protected Disclosures Act

[31]    Section 1(i) of the PDA describes a disclosure as: 

". . . any disclosure of information regarding any conduct of an employer, or an employee of that employer, made by any employee who has reason to believe that the information concerned shows or tends to show one or more of the following:

that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely to be committed;
that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which that person is subject;

. . .

that any matter referred to in paragraphs (a) to (f) has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed."

[32]    Any conduct that falls within any of these categories constitutes an "impropriety" under the PDA.

[33]    The PDA protects a disclosure, inter alia, to an employer in accordance with section 6 and a person or body in accordance with sections 8 and 9.

[34]    Section 6(1)(a) protects a disclosure of information made in good faith and substantially in accordance with any procedure prescribed or authorised by the employer for reporting or otherwise remedying the impropriety.

[35]    Section 8 deals with protected disclosures to certain persons of bodies in the following terms:

Any disclosure made in good faith to– 
the Public Protector;
the Auditor-General; or
a person or body prescribed for purposes of this section; and in respect of which the employee concerned reasonably believes that– 
the relevant impropriety falls within the description of matters which, in the ordinary course are dealt with by the person or body concerned; and
the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it, are substantially true, 

is a protected disclosure."

[36]    Section 9 provides as follows in relation to a general protected disclosure:

Any disclosure made in good faith by an employee–
who reasonably believes that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it, are substantially true; and  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 9
 (b) who does not make the disclosure for purposes of personal gain, excluding any reward payable in terms of any law; 

is a protected disclosure if–

one or more of the conditions referred to in subsection (2) apply; and
in the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable to make the disclosure.
The conditions referred to in subsection (1)(i) are–
that at the time the employee who makes the disclosure has reason to believe that he or she will be subjected to an occupational detriment if he or she makes a disclosure to his or her employer in accordance with section 6;
that, in a case where no person or body is prescribed for the purposes of section 8 in relation to the relevant impropriety, the employee making the disclosure has reason to believe that it is likely that evidence relating to the impropriety will be concealed or destroyed if he or she makes the disclosure to his or her employer;
that the employee making the disclosure has previously made a disclosure of substantially the same information to–
his or her employer; or
a person or body referred to in section 8 in respect of which no action was taken within a reasonable period after the disclosure; or 
that the impropriety is of an exceptionally serious nature.
In determining for the purposes of subsection (1)(ii) whether it is reasonable for the employee to make the disclosure, consideration must be given to–
the identity of the person to whom the disclosure is made;
the seriousness of the impropriety;
whether the impropriety is continuing or is likely to occur in the future;
whether the disclosure is made in breach of a duty of confidentiality of the employer towards any other person;
in a case falling within subsection (2)(c), any action which the employer or the person or body to whom the disclosure was made, has taken, or might reasonably be expected to have taken, as a result of the previous disclosure;
in a case falling within subsection (2)(c)(i), whether in making the disclosure to the employer the employee complied with any procedure which was authorised by the employer; and
the public interest.
For the purposes of this section a subsequent disclosure may be regarded as a disclosure of substantially the same information referred  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 10
to in subsection (2)(c) where such subsequent disclosure extends to information concerning an action taken or not taken by any person as a result of the previous disclosure."

The applicant's submissions

[37]    Applicant's counsel, Mr Lagrange, submitted that in making the disclosure to the employer the applicant made statements containing information and factual allegations to the following effect:

in the Enterprise article about Dludla the claims about her qualifications were not correct;
there was a link between the CEO and Dludla in their previous work;
an alleged fraudulent CV was submitted by Dludla to the respondent;
the fraudulent claim about the qualification was publicly announced in the article;
the CEO knew about the false information in the CV; and
the HR policy governing advertising, interviews and the like had been contravened in the making of Dludla's appointments.

[38]    In the applicant's view this had serious implications for the respondent in that:

the strategic description of Dludla's job meant the misrepresentation of qualifications related to an incumbent of a position of trust who dealt with policy matters;
favouritism and nepotism in appointments were serious offences;
permitting the publication of the fraudulent misrepresentation knowing it to be fraudulent amounted to the CEO being an accessory to fraud;
the importance of correct qualifications to a body that dealt with promoting recognised educational qualifications made the matter an important one for the respondent; and
the respondent's reputation had already been tarnished by the previous CEO's fraudulent misrepresentation of his qualifications.

[39]    Until the applicant was shown a copy of Dludla's CV during the Exco investigation which followed his external disclosures, he believed that the CV  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 11
she had submitted to the respondent, and on the basis of which she had been appointed to an executive position, had misrepresented her as having a BA. His belief was based on the fact that the executive position to which she was appointed would have required a tertiary qualification and that accordingly to get appointed she must have presented a tertiary qualification; he knew that Dludla did not have a degree at the time the article was written; and moreover Malebye had understood her CV to reflect a BA degree.

[40]    The applicant had formed the view that the CEO was complicit in concealing Dludla's qualifications, based on the information from Modikoe that the CEO seemed aware of her lack of qualifications, and that the CEO had previously worked with Dludla. On this basis he thought that as the person responsible for her recruitment the CEO would have known of her real qualifications or would have verified them and realised that she did not have a BA degree.

[41]    The applicant's requests for the CV implied that he believed in his allegations. However, although it turned out that only the article was incorrect, without the applicant's raising it the matter would not have come to light, and no attempt would have been made to correct the public misrepresentation, as the respondent sought to do once the applicant had made the disclosure.

[42]    The applicant acted in good faith in making the disclosure to the CEO confidentially and inviting him to meet to discuss the issue. He was concerned about the reputational risk to the respondent given the scandal surrounding the previous CEO and his qualifications, and did not want the issue to reach the media. He had made his disclosure in terms of the applicable procedure and protocol, and his refusal to participate fully in the internal investigations was justified in that he had concerns about bias and independence of the 2Cs and Exco.

[43]    In regard to his external disclosures, the applicant had intended to raise the same issues as in his internal e-mail, as well as the CBP issue. He relied on the information on the Public Protector's website to bring the disclosure within its ambit (although, counsel submitted, it is moot whether the further requirements of section 8(1)(c)(i) and (ii) are applicable to the Public Protector as well, as was assumed by this Court in Sekgobela v State Information Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd (2008) 29 ILJ 1995 (LC)). Furthermore, he indicated his willingness to provide more information to the bodies to whom he made the external disclosures. His complaint was not against the respondent, but the CEO and Dludla, and he had no intention of embarrassing the respondent.

[44]    The applicant's state of knowledge at the time he made the external disclosures about the substantial truth of what he was claiming in so far as it related to the matters disclosed in his internal disclosure, was no different  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 12
from what it had been at the time he made that disclosure in his e-mail of 17 July, and he had reason to believe the matters were substantially true.

[45]    Accordingly, counsel submitted, the combined bits of information that applicant received had formed a picture in his mind which led to his belief that the CEO was complicit in concealing Dludla's qualifications, and that this was done in order to secure her promotion. The facts that came to his attention were not hermetically sealed off from one another, and viewed as a whole could have provided a reasonable basis for him to form this belief about the improprieties. Although the applicant may not have formed the only opinion that was possible in the circumstances, the factors he relied on, in combination with one another, could have led to the reasonable suspicion that something was seriously amiss. And indeed, it was submitted, something was amiss – the article was incorrect in stating that Dludla had a BA – and the applicant's intervention had resulted in the respondent seeking a correction.

[46]    Finally, Mr Lagrange submitted that the applicant had met the requirements of a protected disclosure and that it was done in good faith. Furthermore, in relation to his external disclosures, he had substantially complied with the test for a protected disclosure under sections 8 and 9 of the PDA.

The respondent's submissions

[47]    The respondent's counsel, Mr Myburgh, submitted that the process for determining whether a disclosure is protected has been set out as "a four- stage process that begins with an analysis of the information to determine whether it is a disclosure. If it is, the next question is whether it is protected. The third stage is to determine whether the employee was subjected to any occupational detriment and, lastly, what remedy should be awarded for such treatment. It is not an enquiry into wrongdoing, but about whether the employee deserves protection (Tshishonga v Minister of Justice & Constitutional Development & another [2007] 4 BLLR 327 (LC) [also reported at [2007] JOL 18875 (LC)–Ed] at paragraph [176]).

[48]    In these proceedings the court is seized only with the first two stages and has only heard evidence on this aspect.

[49]    The applicant bears the evidentiary burden of proving that his disclosures are protected by the Act (Kroukam v SA Airlink (Pty) Ltd (2005) 26 ILJ 2153 (LAC) [also reported at [2006] JOL 15771 (LAC)–Ed] at 2207; Tshishonga v Minister of Justice & Constitutional Development & another [2007] 4 BLLR 327 (LAC) at paragraph [215]; Engineering Council of SA & another v City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality & another [2008] 6 BLLR 571 (T) [also reported at [2008] JOL 21387 (T)–Ed] at paragraph [113]).

[50]    The meaning of "disclosure" 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 13
Mr Myburgh provided an extensive review of the jurisprudence of this Court on the issues, and submitted that the meaning of "disclosure" in the PDA should be interpreted to exclude "normal duty reports", in other words those made in the normal ordinary course of the employee's duties. He submitted that "disclosure" in the PDA must bear its ordinary meaning, ie a "revelation" or "exposure" synonymous with whistle blowing. He relied on the purposive interpretation applied by the USA Federal Circuit Court of Appeals to the Whistleblower Protection Act, 1989 ("WPA") in Huffman v Office of Personnel Management 263 F 3d 1341 (Fed Circuit 2001), Willis v Department of Agriculture 141 F 3d 1139 (Fed Cir 1998) and Horton v Department of Navy 66 F 3d 279 (Fed Cir 1995). Mr Myburgh implored this Court to find that the meaning of "disclosure" is at the very least ambiguous and should be interpreted in the context of the objective of the PDA, which is to protect whistleblowers, and should therefore be interpreted to mean conduct synonymous with whistle blowing.

Applicant's counsel cited a dictionary meaning of "disclose" and submitted that although it was defined as including "reveal" or "expose", it also had a "less dramatic meaning", of "to make known". Furthermore, he submitted that the WPA's application to federal employees, inter alia, rendered it less relevant than other legislation more specifically the Public Interest Disclosure Act, 1998 ("PIDA") of the United Kingdom, in determining the legislative intention behind the PDA. The Tshishonga court had furthermore made reference to the PIDA as being substantively incorporated into the definitions of "disclosure" and "impropriety" in the PDA.

[51]    The meaning of "information"

In Tshishonga Pillay J held that:

"Information includes, but is not limited to, facts. By its nature, uncovering impropriety often starts with a suspicion. Information would include such inferences and opinion based on facts that show that the suspicion is reasonable and sufficient to warrant an investigation" (counsel's emphasis) (at paragraph [179]).

. . .

'Smelling a rat' is not information, nor are 'unsubstantiated rumours'" (Tshishonga at paragraph [181]).

Furthermore, in CWU & another v Mobile Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd [2003] 8 BLLR 741 (LC) [also reported at [2003] JOL 11147 (LC)–Ed] at paragraph [22], the court held:

"The disclosure relied on by the second applicant as a protected disclosure was no more than an expression of a subjectively held opinion or an accusation, rather than a disclosure of information. It is clear from the  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 14
judgement in Grieve v Denel . . . that the disclosure considered worthy of in that instance was a disclosure of information that, on a prima facie basis at least, was both carefully documented and supported. It was a disclosure of information that was clearly indicative of a breach of legal obligations and possibly criminal conduct on the part of the employer concerned. In the present instance, the only information preferred by the second applicant . . . was that contained in his e-mail . . . There is no factual basis, however tenuous, in any of the second applicant's communications to justify the conclusion that they constituted anything other than his personal opinion that what appears to amount to a preferred supplier arrangement was improper. There is no information offered that indicates in the slightest any impropriety on the part of any member of MTN's management. The statement: '[p]ersonally, I smell a rat and think that there are people senior than us who are losing revenue if Thalefang is not placing agents at MTN and thus the justification not to make staff permanent' is not a disclosure of information rather than an unfortunately phrased expression of the second applicant's personal views."

Pillay J held furthermore that the standard of quality that the information must meet is pitched no higher than requiring the impropriety to be "likely". It is enough if the information "tends to show" an impropriety. This, the court said, "anticipates the possibility that no impropriety might ever be committed or proven eventually". Thus "[l]ikely" and "tends to show" therefore mean that the impropriety "can be less than a probability, but must be more than a mere possibility" (Tshishonga at paragraph [180]).

[52]    The meaning of "reason to believe"

Tshishonga (at paragraphs [185]–[192]) held as follows regarding the interpretation of "reason to believe" in the definition of "disclosure":

"[185]  The text '[a]ny employee who has reason to believe' pitches the test as subjective in that the employee who makes the disclosure has to hold the belief. It is objective in the sense that the belief has to be reasonable. Whether the belief is reasonable is a finding of fact based on what is believed. Thus, if the employer clearly has no legal obligation, the employee's belief that he does cannot be reasonable. Conversely, if some wrongdoing is occurring which does not fall within the definition of impropriety, but the employee reasonably believes that it does, reporting it would still qualify as a disclosure if the employee reasonably believes that it does amount to an impropriety.

[186]    The PDA does not require an employee to prove the truth of the information disclosed. If the employee believes that the information is true, it would fortify the reasonableness of his belief, from which, in turn, his bona fides can be inferred.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 15

[187]    The requirement of 'reason to believe' cannot be equated to personal knowledge of the information disclosed. That would set so high a standard as to frustrate the operation of the PDA. [In this context] [d]isclosure of hearsay would, depending on its reliability, [also] be reasonable.

. . .

[191]    . . . If the primary . . . purpose of the reporting is to embarrass or harass the employer the reasonableness of the employee's belief is questionable.

[192]    Malcontents and employees who slander the employer without foundation, or disagree on the way the organisation is managed, do not enjoy whistle-blower protection."

[53]    The meaning of "good faith"

The court in Tshishonga (at paragraphs [202]–[206]) referred to the following definition in Street v Unemployed Workers' Centre [2004] 4 All ER 839 in considering the meaning of good faith in the context of a disclosure:

"Shorn of context, the words 'in good faith' have a core meaning of honesty. Introduce context, and it calls for further elaboration. Thus in the context of a claim or representation, the sole issue as to honesty may just turn on its truth. But even where the content of the statement is true or reasonably believed by its maker to be true, an issue of honesty may still creep in according to whether it is made with sincerity of intention for which the Act provides protection or for an ulterior and, say, malicious purpose.

The court held that by setting good faith as a specific requirement in the PDA, the Legislature must have intended that it should include something more than reasonable belief and the absence of personal gain. An employee may reasonably believe in the truth of the disclosures and may gain nothing from making them, but his good faith or motive would be questionable if the information does not disclose an impropriety or if the disclosure is not aimed at remedying a wrong.

Good faith is a finding of fact. The court has to consider all the evidence cumulatively to decide whether there is good faith or an ulterior motive, or, if there are mixed motives, what the dominant motive it.

A whistle blower is unlikely to have 'warm feelings' about the wrongdoing or person against whom disclosure is made. At the other extreme a whistle blower who is overwhelmed by an ulterior motive, that is a motive other than that to prevent or stop wrongdoing, may not claim protection under the PDA. The requirement of good faith therefore invokes a proportionality test to determine the dominant motive." 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 16
Furthermore, in CWU v Mobile Telephone Networks (cited above, at paragraph [21]) the court held in regard to good faith that:

"An employee who deliberately sets out to embarrass or harass an employer is not likely to satisfy the requirement of good faith. It does not necessarily follow though that good faith requires proof of the validity of any concerns or suspicions that an employee may have, or even a belief that any wrongdoing has actually occurred. The purpose of the PDA would be undermined if genuine concerns or suspicions were not protected in an employment context even if they later proved to be unfounded. There is no doubt why disclosures made in general circumstances require in addition to good faith a reasonable belief in the substantial truth of the allegation. However more extensive the rights established by the PDA might be in the employment context, I do not consider that it was intended to protect what amounts to mere rumours or conjecture."

In Grieve v Denel the court came to the following conclusion on good faith:

"[12]  . . . Although the disclosures are made in the process of what appears to be a campaign by employees to resolve difficulties they have with the management style of the general manager and designed to try and achieve his removal or transfer from the division at which they are employed, this in itself does not seem to me to be sufficient reason to find that the disclosures have not been made bona fide. Prima facie they appear to be based on information which is documented and supported and although there may be adequate explanations and the reasons for providing the information may go beyond merely wishing to draw these matters to the attention of the management of respondent, nonetheless in my assessment at a prima facie level the applicant has established that the disclosures were made bona fide" (Grieve v Denel (Pty) Ltd (2003) 24 ILJ 551 (LC) [also reported at [2003] 4 BLLR 366 (LC)–Ed] at paragraph [12]).

"[11]  There is no way, in the court's view, that the conduct of the applicant would be protected by the [PDA]. The disclosure was not bona fide. She turned down an opportunity to be clarified. In my view, it is not the purpose of the Act to give licence to employees to make unsubstantiated and disparaging remarks about their employers and later hide behind the Act . . . 

[12]    . .  the evidence was overwhelming . . . that the allegations are far from being substantially true. The applicant spurned an invitation to verify that her allegations are not true. That being so, how can she be seen as bona fide?" (Roos v Commissioner Stone NO & others [2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) [also reported at [2007] JOL 19889 (LC)–Ed] at paragraphs [11]–[12]).

The court in Tshishonga likewise held that an employee runs the risk of a finding that he acted contrary to good faith where he turns down an opportunity to clarify his allegations or spurns an invitation to verify them.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 17

[54]    Internal vs external disclosures

The PDA sets a hierarchy of protection, with the lowest level of protection being afforded to a legal advisor and the most stringent to public disclosures or those made to bodies that are not prescribed, for example the media (Tshishonga at paragraph [198]).

The PDA therefore encourages internal procedures and remedies to be exhausted before the disclosure is made public (Tshishonga at paragraph [196]).

The purpose of this requirement is for the employer to be given the opportunity to investigate the matter. "Genuine engagement on the issues minimises the risks for both parties. An employee who refuses to engage runs the risks of not being able to show that his belief was reasonable" (Tshishonga at paragraphs [199]–[200]).

In CWU v MTN (cited above) the court considered a whistleblower who was advised about the procedure to be followed and the department to which his disclosure should be directed, and despite this sought a wider audience including his peers and MTN's senior management. The court held:

"As I have noted above, the requirement of disclosure through an authorised channel is an important component of the protection accorded to whistleblowers. There is a difference between the nature and extent of the protections afforded to internal as opposed to external disclosure . . . an internal disclosure does not require a reasonable belief that the information disclosed tends to show that any wrongdoing has occurred. A reasonable belief that any allegation is substantially true is a condition for the protection of any external disclosure. By requiring substantial compliance with a prescribed or authorised procedure, if information disclosed by an employee turns out to be unfounded, little of any damage will have been done to the external reputation of the employer or persons against whom the allegations have been made. By failing to comply with the procedure prescribed and/or authorised by MTN for the further investigation of his allegations, the second applicant removed himself from the ambit of the protection granted by the PDA."

Accordingly the PDA sets a more stringent requirement for external disclosures in that the "reasonableness of the belief must relate to the information being substantially true" (Tshishonga at paragraph [208]).

In this regard the court has held that the test is "subjective in that the employee who makes the disclosure has to hold the belief. It is objective in the sense that the belief has to be reasonable. Whether the belief is  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 18
reasonable is a finding of fact based on what is believed" (Tshishonga at paragraph [185]).

Furthermore, "the meaning of 'substantially true' must lie closer to the total than to a trivial degree of truth. Information of quality and quantity go to determining whether the disclosure is substantially true" (Tshishonga at paragraph [216]).

In addition in regard to the external disclosure to the Public Protector, the respondent submitted that the applicant must show, in addition to good faith, that he reasonably believed that the impropriety in question would be dealt with in the ordinary course by the Public Protector and that the information disclosed (including all the allegations) are substantially true.

The external disclosure to the SIU and DOL must pass through the filters in section 9(1), (2) and (3) in order to be protected. First, it must have been made: 

in good faith; 
in the reasonable belief that it is substantially true; and 
not for personal gain (section 9(1)). 

Secondly, there must be good reason why the employee did not make the disclosure to his employer on one or more of the following four grounds:

because he believed he would be subjected to an occupational detriment if he did so;
there was likelihood of evidence being destroyed or concealed if he did so;
he had previously made a similar disclosure to his employer or the Public Protector, but no action was taken within a reasonable time after the disclosure; or
the impropriety was of an exceptionally serious nature (section 9(2)).

Thirdly, it must have been reasonable to make the disclosure on a consideration of the following factors:

the identity of the person to whom the general disclosure was made;
the seriousness of the impropriety;
whether the impropriety was continuing or likely to occur in the future;
whether the disclosure was made in breach of a duty of confidentiality owed by the employer to another party;
where the disclosure had been made to the employer or Public Protector but no action taken within a reasonable period of time, regard should be had to any action that was taken or might reasonably have been taken, as a result of the previous disclosure; 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 19
(f) where the disclosure had been made to the employer but no action taken within a reasonable period of time, regard should be had to whether, in making the disclosure, the employee complied with any procedure which was authorised by the employer; and
the public interest (section 9(3)).

The tests in sections 9(2) and (3) have been held by this Court to "shift the focus away from an assessment of the employee's good faith and the reasonableness of his beliefs to more tangible and objectively determinable facts" (Tshishonga at paragraph [213]).

[55]    In summary Mr Myburgh submitted that, based on the above-mentioned authorities, to constitute a "disclosure" the applicant must:

disclose (which means a revelation or exposure synonymous with whistle blowing);
information (which must be based on facts not unsubstantiated rumours, conjecture or subjectively held personal opinion);
that he has reason to believe (which belief must be reasonable – and is liable to being exposed as unreasonable if the employee refuses to engage in an ensuing investigation); and
shows or tends to show the commission of a listed impropriety (which likelihood can be less than a probability but must be more than a mere possibility).

[56]    The applicant had confirmed that the substance of his disclosure was that the CEO was complicit in the fraudulent CV in order to secure Dludla's appointment as Executive Manager. However, the applicant had no "information" that he relied on to indicate impropriety on the part of the CEO. In other words, he may have felt something was amiss, or "smelt a rat", but this did not constitute a disclosure of information. It was, Mr Myburgh submitted, an unfortunately phrased expression of the assumptions he made based on his personal views.

[57]    Furthermore, in so far as the applicant alleged that there were issues relating to non-compliance with the Human Resources policy, these did not warrant separate consideration as they formed part of the same disclosure and this Court cannot "slice and dice" the allegations. They were in any event, issues that had already been raised by the management team and constituted "old" allegations.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 20

[58]    For a protected disclosure to the employer the applicant must also show that it was made in good faith and substantially in accordance with any prescribed or authorised procedure for the reporting of the impropriety, or to the employer where there is no such procedure.

[59]    Good faith requires the applicant to have acted:

honestly;
in the reasonable belief that the information was true;
with sincerity of intention;
not for an ulterior purpose; and
not with the intention of embarrassing or harassing his employer.

[60]    Mr Myburgh submitted that the allegation of recruitment fraud in the 17 July e-mail was not made in good faith because it was based on a fabrication of the foundational evidence by the applicant, ie that Malebye had seen the fraudulent CV. Thus he cannot be said to have acted honestly, in the reasonable belief that the "information" he received was true, and with sincerity of intention. It must follow then that he had an ulterior motive, which was to embarrass and harass the CEO and ultimately procure his dismissal, which was the remedy he requested in his referral to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation & Arbitration.

[61]    Moreover, the applicant spurned all the opportunities that would have enabled him to clarify and substantiate his allegations. He submits that his reasons were legitimate in that, inter alia, the CFO and COO would have been biased in conducting their investigation; that the Board members appointed to the Exco investigation were themselves implicated in the financial mismanagement relating to the shop stewards CBP (although he turned out to have been incorrect about one of them); and that the person eventually appointed to chair the disciplinary enquiry was considered to be biased but notwithstanding this he could not explain why he had not sought his recusal. However, on the evidence it was clear that the applicant's inability to participate in the internal investigations was for no reason other than his inability to substantiate his allegations.

[62]    It was submitted that the requirement that the employee should "reasonably believe" that his allegations are "substantially true" (which applies to all the allegations in the applicant's external disclosures) should relate to each and every one of his allegations, as required by sections 8(1)(c)(iii) and 9(1)(a). This is a more stringent test than the "reasonable belief" test applicable to internal disclosures.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 21

[63]    In relation to the external disclosures to the SIU and DOL, it was submitted, the applicant did not meet the requirements of section 9(2), ie that he did not make a disclosure to his employer because he believed he would be subject to an occupational detriment if he did so, or that there was a likelihood of evidence being concealed or destroyed; or that he had made a substantially similar disclosure to the employer or Public Protector but no action was taken within a reasonable time after the disclosure. In so far as the applicant submitted that this requirement meant he must wait for a reasonable time, the respondent submitted that this is not correct and the requirement is that he is only entitled to proceed with a general disclosure if the employer or Public Protector did not take action within a reasonable time. Thus, it was submitted, this ground cannot be sustained since it is clear that the employer did act promptly in convening an investigation. It was submitted that the applicant had misconstrued this requirement – it was not a question that he was "not winning" as he put it, but rather whether the respondent acted within a reasonable time and it indisputably did so. Accordingly, the only relevant ground is that the impropriety was of an exceptionally serious nature.

[64]    The applicant is also unable to show that it was reasonable to make the disclosure to the SIU and DOL on consideration of the factors specified in section 9(3), inter alia, for the following reasons:

There was no prospect of a continuation of the impropriety (the recruitment fraud in relation to Dludla);
The disclosure was made in breach of a duty of confidentiality owed by the respondent to Dludla, in that the applicant had obtained her academic transcript from UNISA under false pretences in that his reliance on a MOU with UNISA was clearly contrived;
He made the general disclosures simultaneously with that to the Public Protector, without allowing a reasonable time to elapse;
The respondent did take action within a reasonable time of the internal disclosure having been made, and notwithstanding this the applicant published the internal disclosure widely to all executive managers in breach of "procedure and protocol".

[65]    Mr Myburgh submitted that if a disclosure is based on fabricated information (as, in this case), the court must exclude the applicant on the first leg, ie that there was no "information" and it is not even necessary then to enquire into whether or not there was good faith. However, should the court find that "information" was disclosed, the applicant is unable to show that in making the disclosure to the employer he acted honestly, in the reasonable belief that the information was true, with sincerity of intention, and not for an ulterior purpose  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 22
nor with the intention of embarrassing or harassing his employer. In this instance the applicant was dishonest and could never be said to have acted in good faith, in that, inter alia, he lied about Khoza and Malebye, whose reports were critical to his disclosure. He cannot be found to have disclosed "information", or to have acted in "good faith". If he does succeed in establishing both of these grounds, he must still convince the court that in regard to the external disclosures he "reasonably believed" the allegations were "substantially true", and that this requirement applied to each and every one of his allegations. He could not, for instance, claim that some allegations were protected disclosures (ie the fabricated CV) and others (ie the CEO's complicity) were not.

Analysis of evidence and argument

[66]    I do not consider it necessary to decide whether the PDA applies only to a revelation or other conduct synonymous with whistle blowing. For purposes of this ruling it is sufficient to consider the applicant's disclosure to constitute the "making known" or stating of information irrespective of whether it constitutes something not known to anyone else in the employment or public domain, or whether he has a legal or fiduciary duty or is obliged in terms of his work responsibilities to report it. In any event, an approach that divides disclosures simply between a revelation on the one hand, and a "normal duty report" on the other, would seem to me to bear an inherent danger of conflating the motive of the employee (for instance, to make a disclosure with the purpose of avoiding adverse disciplinary action), with the actual content of the disclosure. This is inherently flawed. The Legislature must have envisaged that the PDA would extend to conduct on the spectrum between a revelation and a normal duty report. Furthermore, even if the PDA were to be interpreted to exclude normal duty reports, the say-so of the applicant that he did not intend his disclosures to be protected as they were made in the ordinary course of his employment would, in any event, not be sufficient to remove them from the ambit of the PDA's protection.

[67]    I have proceeded on the basis that the HR issues do not constitute separate disclosures in that, on the evidence, they from part and parcel of the disclosure defined by the applicant as constituting "recruitment fraud".

[68]    In my view, the applicant had no information to sustain his allegations concerning recruitment fraud, and they amount to "mere rumours or conjecture" on his part. My reasons are as follows.

[69]    None of the items on the applicant's own list "Information/Documents in my procession (sic) prior to email of 17 July 2006", ie the "B1:295 list" supports the allegation of recruitment fraud. More importantly, he did not mention the report from Malebye regarding the CV, despite this being the critical fact that  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 23
would have substantiated his allegations. Malebye denied that she was the source of information about the fraudulent CV. Her version, on the probabilities, is accepted. Applicant's counsel argued that it was inconceivable that Malebye, as she testified, was indifferent to the events unfolding at the respondent, and that the applicant would not have listed her as a potential witness in his disciplinary enquiry if she had not been his informant. It is not inconceivable that the applicant may have anticipated her testimony on a range of other matters given her role in the Human Resources department. Furthermore, it is not inconceivable that there are employees like Malebye who do not engage in office dynamics but choose instead to focus on their work. This is a probable explanation. Malebye was an impressive witness, her evidence was solid and consistent and she came across as an honest no-nonsense type of person. Her version is accepted on the probabilities. It is unlikely that she would have breached her confidentiality undertaking and risked losing her job in order to obtain the CV at the applicant's behest. Furthermore, the applicant's evidence-in-chief about the information from Malebye conflicts in material respects with his evidence to the Exco investigation, and cannot be reconciled.

[70]    The applicant's evidence about the information he received from Khoza was riddled with inconsistencies. He was unable to explain, inter alia, why he would ask Khoza to commit to writing the innocuous fact that he did not write the article whilst not seeking confirmation of the fact that Khoza had received other anonymous telephonic queries about the article. The information about the other calls is not mentioned in his B1:295 list (which was prepared during these proceedings to assist him). When the difficulties with his evidence became apparent to him in cross-examination, he resorted to conveniently changing his version in regard to Khoza and the date of the e-mail. Khoza, on the other hand, was an impressive witness who gave consistent and clear evidence, which was indeed a "breath of fresh air" in the context of the applicant's lengthy ramblings.

[71]    The applicant's report of information received from Thapelo Molatudi is likewise unreliable. Molatudi was not called as a witness and the applicant contradicted his evidence in regard to her having delivered the article to him, initially testifying that Modikoe had sent her as a runner, and then blaming his counsel for his failure to recall, until he was cross-examined, that Molatudi had told him she had also received queries from anonymous callers. It is unlikely that Modikoe would not have raised the issue with the applicant, or moreover that it would not have come to her attention as Head of Marketing & Communications, that queries regarding Dludla's qualifications as reflected in the article had been raised with her staff.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 24

[72]    Ultimately of course, the key to his "information" was the timing and receipt of the anonymous telephone call. In this regard the applicant's evidence was, as respondent's counsel put it, "so fortuitous as to be bizarre". It was made firstly 15 months after publication of the article and during the currency of an internal investigation. Notwithstanding this he does not mention it to the investigation. In fact he mentions it for the first time only in his evidence-in-chief in these proceedings. However, he changed his version of the timing of the anonymous call to suit his evidence about the date of Khoza's e-mail, and then recalls for the first time in cross-examination that the caller had mentioned Khoza, which is what had led him to Khoza. He had, however, already testified that it was the reference to Khoza in the article that had prompted his contact with him. It is also fortuitous that the caller is put through to the applicant and that he is the only one of the nine executives available to take the call. The only probable conclusion in the circumstances is that no such call was made and the applicant's entire version on this aspect is a complete fabrication.

[73]    In relation to the lack of detail in his external disclosures, the applicant cited a spurious concern about the security of his communications. This is not probable in circumstances where he had already provided details to the CEO in his 17 July e-mail, and was unable to explain why he had not taken steps to safeguard his communications. His disclosure to the Public Protector, in the absence of detail and the promised witness statements, constituted a regurgitation of the terms "fraud / misadministration / management" from the website, and without further particularity cannot be considered to be information.

[74]    His disclosure may have been made in compliance with "procedure and protocol", as he put it, but his failure to co-operate fully with the internal investigations is spurious and unsustainable. The applicant conceded that the respondent was entitled to investigate his disclosure in the manner it saw fit, and denied that he had refused to co-operate, testifying instead that he understood that the investigation would proceed on the basis of a mutual sharing of information. There can be no reasonable basis on which he could have inferred, at the end of the first meeting with the investigation team, that they were in agreement with his approach that the investigation would proceed by way of a mutual sharing of information. Furthermore, he was "not winning" with the 2C investigation and this prompted him to go external. This, it was submitted by counsel, is analogous to the situation in MTN where the applicant was told to report his complaint to a particular officer, but then sought a wider audience. As such he cannot seek the protection of the PDA. In circumstances therefore where the applicant was aware of the requirement that the internal disclosure was confidential; where an investigation was  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 25
convened reasonably speedily by the CEO; and where he sought to disengage, he cannot rely on the PDA to protect him.

[75]    There is accordingly, in my view, no basis to justify the applicant's contention that he disclosed "information". On the contrary, he could not have had any genuine concerns or suspicions and was simply articulating a fiction created in his own mind. His disclosures cannot be said to have been based on any inferences or opinion which indicate that his suspicions are reasonable. It was based purely on his personal opinion that the CEO was complicit in recruitment fraud. In other words, he may have felt something was amiss, or "smelt a rat", but this is not a disclosure of information but rather "an unfortunately phrased expression of the assumptions he made based on his personal views" (CWU & another v Mobile Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd [2003] 8 BLLR 741 (LC) at paragraph [22]). He acted moreover on pure supposition which explains why he made an important concession in cross-examination of the fact that the first time the full story of his disclosure came to fore was in his evidence-in-chief before this Court. This in itself speaks volumes.

[76]    It follows then that the applicant would have no basis to participate in the grievance and Exco investigations, or even to testify at his disciplinary enquiry. He had promised witnesses and evidence which were not forthcoming and then eventually resorted to an ex post facto fabrication in an effort to justify his accusations. This is evident, inter alia, from his testimony that he was protecting his sources, and to prevent himself facing the same fate as Mokotedi (who he said was dismissed for whistle blowing and which was later proven to be false). His own sources, Khoza and Malebye, did not support his version, and this dispenses with his evidence on this issue. His reasons for not giving evidence before the disciplinary enquiry were likewise riddled with inconsistencies – he propounded the self-defeating proposition that he considered the chair to be biased but then conceded that he had believed he would get a fair hearing. The only probable conclusion that can be drawn from his evidence, in the circumstances, is that he did not participate in the enquiries and provide the full information at his disposal because he had no such information. If he had information and had reason to believe it there would have been no reason why he would not have disclosed it at the time, whilst seeking, as he is doing, the protection of the Act. Indeed this is what the Act intends – this is its very purpose. His refusal to co-operate with the internal investigations is furthermore not the sort of conduct one expects from someone who believes he has a legitimate cause which he is protected by law from being victimised for.

[77]    If the applicant had no "information" to substantiate his disclosures he could not have had any "reason to believe" the allegations, let alone a "reasonable belief in the substantial truth of the information" applicable to his external  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 26
disclosures. In this context the reasonableness of the belief must relate to the information being substantially true. This means that the employee must reasonably believe in the weight of the allegations. There must also be some indication of the veracity of the allegations having been investigated by the applicant and found to be valid, before he proceeds to make the external disclosure. No such validity was found by the applicant and he acted prematurely in making the external disclosure. One cannot but infer that the timing of the external disclosure was dictated by the fact that he was under pressure to disclose his sources and to justify his allegations, or, as Mr Myburgh put it, "when the shoe began to pinch". This can never be a valid basis for ignoring the internal investigation process and making his disclosures external.

[78]    The fabrication of his information is further compounded by his belated attempt to link the CBP, with his external disclosures. This became necessary to corroborate his evidence that the SIU had investigated his external disclosures. However, his evidence on this aspect turned out to be untrue as the SIU correspondence produced proved that the investigation was linked to a subsequent disclosure he made in November 2007, ie after he had been dismissed. Furthermore, the "numerous responses" he referred to in his evidence-in-chief as being forthcoming from the DOL pursuant to his external disclosures amounted to simply one letter indicating that the allegations had been investigated and found to be unfounded. The DOL response makes no mention of the shop stewards CBP forming part of his disclosure.

[79]    However, even if the applicant is believed in relation to Malebye, the fact that she saw a fraudulent CV does not "show or tend to show" the commission of a listed impropriety. Even on his own version (if he is to be believed about Malebye), the applicant was not sure about whether a fraudulent CV existed. He had also told the 2C investigation that it was "unlikely" that the CEO was guilty of criminal activity. He cannot get the benefit of the PDA if he alleges something he does not believe will be proven. Despite this he makes direct accusations of the CEO's involvement in fraud, even though he knew full well that Dludla did not require a degree (fabricated with the assistance of the CEO or otherwise) to be appointed or promoted as Executive Manager. To say that the CEO fabricated her CV in order to enable her to access the executive appointment was an inference he could not have possibly drawn in the circumstances, and this goes to his motive for making the disclosure. It follows that the applicant could not have acted in "good faith", inter alia, in that he fabricated the foundational evidence on which his allegation of recruitment fraud was based, and cannot be said to have acted honestly, with sincerity of intention and in the reasonable belief that the "information" was true. He  
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 27
accordingly had an ulterior purpose in making the allegations, namely, to harass and embarrass the CEO and seek his dismissal.

[80]    Furthermore, in the light of the numerous inconsistencies in the applicant's evidence, viewed in the context of his high level of academic and professional qualifications and his obvious extensive preparation for this matter, I have to make a point about his credibility. The applicable test, it was submitted by respondent's counsel, has been stated as follows:

"There is not rule that where a witness has lied his testimony must be rejected without more ado – all that can be said is that a witness whose evidence has been shown to be deliberately false on one point is liable to be regarded with suspicion and distrust, and that the trier of fact may (not must) conclude that his evidence on another point cannot be safely accepted.

The question is not whether a witness is wholly truthful in all that he says, but whether the court can be satisfied . . . on a balance of probabilities in a civil matter, that the story which the witness tells is a true one in its essential features" ("Credibility of witnesses" (1985) 102 SALJ 32 at 35).

I have accordingly treated the A's evidence with caution given that the first time he gave a full version was in these proceedings. Things may very well have turned out differently for him had he co-operated with the internal investigations and filled in the blanks in the information he disclosed to the employer and the external bodies. However, it is clear that there was no recourse for the applicant – faced with the prospect of being discovered to have had no information or facts to substantiate his allegations, he simply made them up. He became rude and argumentative on numerous occasions, and resorted to blaming his counsel when it became obvious he was getting caught in his own lies. In the light of the numerous falsehoods in the applicant's evidence, I am unable to conclude that the essential features of his evidence are true on a balance of probabilities. My reasons for this are set out above.

[81]    In the circumstances, it is clear that the applicant doubted the veracity of his own allegations. There was no basis for him to have proceeded with the external disclosures in the context of, inter alia, his lack of co-operation with the internal process initiated by the respondent. Furthermore I cannot find, on the facts, that he acted in good faith. Accordingly it follows that, in relation to the internal enquiry, he could not have held a reasonable belief that there was an impropriety, and he could not have reasonably believed his external disclosures to be substantially true or to have in fact been justified in the first place.

 
[2009] JOL 23511 (LC) at 28

Order

[82]    For the reasons set out above, the court finds that the applicant has not made a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act. Costs follow the result.

Appearance:
Adv R Lagrange, JD Verster Labour Law Offices (At); Adv A Myburgh, Webber Wentzel Attorneys (R)


End of Document