



South African Municipal Workers Union obo Xhotyeni / Buffalo City Municipality [2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Eastern Cape Division
Case No: ECD 021011
Hearing Date(s): 14 / 07 / 2010; 27 / 08 / 2010
Award Date(s): 17 / 09 / 2010
Before: Ntombekhaya Sesani


Keywords


Labour Law — Dismissal — Theft — Fuel — Absence of requisition — Failure to explain

 Labour Law – Arbitration – Arbitrator – Bias alleged – Groundless


Mini Summary

The applicant challenged his dismissal for having stolen the 125 litres of diesel fuel found in his possession. The applicant claimed that he had been taking the fuel to a fellow employee, Mr Gqizana, who had requested it for his truck.

Held that the applicant did not have the requisition with him and, when apprehended, did not say that the requisition was with Mr Gqizana. He later alleged that the requisition had been with Mr Gqizana, but Gqizana stated in evidence that it had been with the applicant. In response to gestures by the applicant the witness changed his statement, stating that the requisition was indeed with him. The applicant’s conduct was that of a dishonest person. If he had been telling the truth when he was apprehended he would have contacted Mr Gqizana to obtain the requisition to prove his innocence. The fuel had been dispensed into the containers without the necessary requisition because of the trust the person dispensing the fuel had in his supervisor (the applicant). Thereafter the applicant failed to advise Mr Gqizana of what had happened on the day in question. Any reasonable person would have advised Mr Gqizana of the incident so that he could clear it up. This suggested that Mr Gqizana was not involved in this matter. In the circumstances the dismissal of the applicant on grounds of having stolen fuel was warranted.

 
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 2




Details of hearing and representation

This matter came before me for arbitration in East London on 14 July as well as 27 August 2010. The employee was represented by Mr Tulani Nikani from SAMWU. Mr Elliot Nombila, a labour relations practitioner in the employ of the respondent represented the respondent, Buffalo City Municipality.

Issue to be decided

I am required to decide whether the dismissal of the applicant was fair or not.

Background to the case

The applicant started working for respondent on 1 March 1997.
He was working as a Transport Co-ordinator, earning R13 000 a month.
He was dismissed on 18 February 2010.

Survey of evidence and argument

Respondent's case

In presenting the respondent's case Mr Nombila called five witnesses to testify. The first witness for the respondent was Mr Thobela R Gola, who after being duly sworn in testified as follows:

He works for the respondent as a sergeant with the BCM Police and his duties amongst others include dealing with by-laws, crime prevention as well as guarding of the respondent's property. Prior to the day of the incident he received instruction from Mr Mahlasela's office to investigate theft of the respondent's property; this included theft of diesel. On the day of the incident, whilst he and a colleague, Mr Mkosana, were investigating the matter, he noticed the applicant leaving Cambridge solid waste in a black Corsa bakkie with 5 X 25lt of diesel, which was dispensed from the fuel tank on site. He was with another employee, Mr Mtshengu. The bakkie travelled to the applicant's place of residence where Mr Mtshengu offloaded the containers with diesel. On approaching the applicant, he indicated that he got the diesel from Bulktans truck. On searching the premises, they also found another 3 X 25 litres of diesel in the garage. They confiscated all the containers and took the applicant and Mr Mtshengu to the police office, where they required statements. He interviewed the applicant and Mtshengu was interviewed by Mr Mkosana. It transpired from Mr Mtshengu's statement that he put the diesel into the containers on the applicant's instruction. Based on such statement, he was released and the applicant incarcerated at Cambridge police station. The fuel was then returned to the respondent.

He further stated that at no stage did he lose sight of what was happening, from the time Mtshengu was dispensing fuel into the containers until the time he was offloading the containers at the applicant's place of residence.

During cross-examination, he stated that the reason why Mr Mtshengu was not arrested was because he fell under the category of being a whistle-blower and as such became a state witness. He also stated that no fuel is supposed to be dispensed without a requisition form and in this instance, the applicant indicated that he did not have the requisition form and as a manager, could write it out anytime. Regarding his statement that was not commissioned, he stated that it was sworn to and the fact that it  
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 3
was commissioned could have been a human error. He conceded that the applicant was interviewed by Mr Mkosana and not him.

The second witness for the respondent was Mr Owen Mtshengu, who after being duly sworn in testified as follows:

He works for the respondent as a diesel attendant and the applicant was his direct supervisor. On the day in question, at about 9am, the applicant arrived and instructed him to fill up 5 x 25 litre containers with diesel. The containers were on the back of the bakkie he was driving. He advised him that he was taking it to the TLB's in Mdantsane. On enquiring regarding the requisition form the applicant advised him that he was going to fill it in later. He did as instructed and thereafter placed the containers at the back of the bakkie. He advised him that they were going to leave together and that he was going to return soon. However, they did not go to Mdantsane but to the applicant's house in Amalinda, where he instructed him to offload two containers, stating that they were going to take the rest to the villages. Whilst offloading, two gentlemen whom he did not know approached him and enquired about the diesel. They subsequently instructed him to return the diesel, offloaded it and took both him and the applicant to their offices in separate cars. The police officers also asked for the requisition but he did not have it. At the police offices they were interviewed and after having explained what happened he was released back to work. The applicant was, however, incarcerated.

He stated that in terms of the respondent's rule he could not fill up any vehicle or container with diesel unless he had a requisition from the person requesting diesel. Without a requisition diesel cannot be accounted for. He filled up the containers even though there was no requisition on the basis that he was acting on his supervisor's instruction. He was the one who was authorising all requisitions and as such he had no reason to question him.

During cross-examination, he stated that he was released on condition that he did not run away. He conceded that the statement he made at the police officers' offices made no reference to theft. He stated, though, that this was because he did not know they were committing theft.

The third witness for the respondent was Mr Mawonga Nyekisa. He was sworn in and testified as follows:

He works for the respondent as a District Cleansing Officer-Operations. He was the applicant's supervisor. One of the duties of the Transport Co-ordinator is to issue out trucks to drivers and the Dispatch Supervisor would distribute the trucks per district. His duty was to ensure that all the trucks were working well and efficiently.

On the day in question fleet number 06V247 was driven by Abner and he was his District Cleansing Officer. They were working together at Duncan Village and he completed his operations, which did not involve loading bags. This means that he had no reason to go to the dumping site. At no stage did he receive a report that Abner could not finish his work as his truck was out of fuel. It worked the whole day on Saturday as well as Sunday with no problems. Also, at no stage did he advise him that he had been waiting for diesel from the applicant. Had he advised him, he would have authorised a requisition for diesel, as he is authorised to do so.

During cross-examination, he stated that he only heard of the incident from Mtshengu at the police station after being advised of such by Mr Apleni, who is the respondent's Acting General Manager, Solid Waste. Regarding the differences in his statement and that of his colleague, Mr Chetty, he stated that they were both advised of what had transpired by Mr Mtshengu and could have heard him differently. He did not investigate the matter but wanted to know what happened. At no stage was the truck mentioned. The conversation took place outside the police station but within the premises.

 
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 4

The fourth witness of the respondent was Ms Wendy Marsberg, who after being duly sworn in testified as follows:

She works for the respondent as an Acting Manager, Arts and Culture and was the chairperson at the applicant's disciplinary hearing. She first met the applicant on 14 December 2009, which was the beginning of the disciplinary hearing and last saw him on 4 February 2010. On her determination she indicated that she made her decision after some consultation. Answering on who she consulted, she indicated that it was labour-related books as well as the respondent's disciplinary code. She stated that there were no aggravating factors submitted by the initiator; however, the offence committed by the applicant was dismissible. The fact that such were not submitted did not make a difference, considering that the offence was dismissible. Her decision was solely based on the evidence led before her

During cross-examination she conceded that as a chairperson she was supposed to be unbiased but further stated that she also had a duty to observe the respondent's disciplinary code. She was not involved with Mr Mtshengu's case. Mr Gqizana was not called at the disciplinary hearing as a witness, as there were allegations of him being intimidated. She had considered the mitigating factors submitted.

The fifth witness for the respondent was Mr Zongezile Apleni. He was sworn in and testified as follows:

He works for the respondent as an Acting General Manager, Solid Waste. The nature of the applicant's job required him to co-ordinate transport for his department and he had the authority to approve requisition forms for diesel as well as supervising petrol attendants. He was also responsible for the monitoring of the vote dealing with fuel and vehicle repairs. He was given authority to oversee the above and if the amount involved was within his authority there was minimal supervision. He was given the above authority based on the trust that the respondent had in him. The offence he committed had breached the trust between the applicant and the respondent irretrievably.

Regarding the incident before me, he testified that he received a call from Mr Mtshengu advising him of his arrest. He in return called Mr Nyekisa and Chetty to look into the matter, as they were supervisors at Solid Waste.

During cross-examination, Mr Nikani referred to Mr Damons' statement, who was the applicant's direct supervisor, which also implicated Mr Mtshengu. He enquired as to why Mr Mtshengu was not charged. Responding to such Mr Apleni stated that Mr Mtshengu was acting on instruction by the applicant. He stated though that Mr Damons' memorandum was just a statement and not a recommendation and that it did not bind the department.

Mr Nombila submitted that the offence committed by the applicant was dismissible. He also submitted that the applicant was in a position of trust and that he had abused such, breaching such trust irretrievably.

Based on the above, he submitted that the applicant's dismissal was fair and prayed that it be upheld.

That concluded the respondent's case.

Applicant's case

In presenting the applicant's case Mr Nikani called two witnesses, including the applicant, to testify. The applicant was duly sworn in and testified as follows:

On the day in question, a Saturday, he reported for duty and Mr Gqizana approached him requesting diesel for his truck. He asked him to make out a requisition for him. He did and he signed it. The pump nozzle did not fit on the truck in question and Mr Gqizana went to fill up at Chiselhurst. He, however, returned without filling his truck, stating that the site at Chiselhurst was closed. He asked him to organise  
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 5
containers, fill them with diesel and take them to his truck. This was common practice, as some of the plant cannot drive to the different sites to fill up (sic – Ed).

Mr Gqizana returned to work and he organised him the containers. He instructed Mr Mtshengu to organise containers and fill them with diesel. He filled up 5 X 25 litres and loaded it on the back of the bakkie. He was not involved during this period. He instructed him to go with him, stating that they were going to start at his place of residence to get his driver's licence. From there they were going to get a pump at another site. Mr Mtshengu went to the change room and it was some time before he came back. He was on the phone but on getting closer switched it off. In the car he seemed to be nervous, talking to himself that he did not know what these people wanted him to do, also stating that he had to save his job. He could not understand what he was on about and on asking him, he could not provide him with an answer.

On arriving at his place of residence he noticed two police officers in the employ of the respondent. They came in and searched his premises. They did not find anything. They subsequently drove with to their offices (sic – Ed). He was driving with Mkosana. He advised him that he had to deliver the diesel to Mr Gqizana and also advised him that Mr Gqizana was in possession of the requisition. Mr Mkosana advised him Mr Gola was refusing (to allow) them to go to fetch the requisition from Mr Gqizana, but insisting that they should go (to) their offices. At the offices they were instructed to write out statements, but he refused as he did not steal any diesel. Mr Mkosana also advised him that they were going to the Cambridge police station where he was going to be incarcerated. He was granted R500 bail on the same day.

On Monday the following week he reported for work and he advised Mr Damons of what had transpired. This surprised him, as he acted in accordance with the respondent's procedure. He was suspended that week on Friday and later advised to attend a disciplinary hearing. The notice was issued by the Human Resources Department. Mr Damons was in the room with Messrs Mahlasela and Snyanya but he was sent outside. This surprised him, as Mr Damons was his immediate supervisor.

At the disciplinary hearing the respondent's witnesses made reference to three police officers whereas there were two. He also stated that he did not understand why Mr Mtshengu was not charged. He further stated that the reason why the respondent did not call Mr Mkosana as a witness was because he advised Mr Nombila that his dismissal was orchestrated by other employees. He further he stated that Mr Mtshengu once told one his colleagues that he was going to get it for not giving him an increment, and fabricating the evidence against him could be his way of getting back at him.

During cross-examination, he stated that the vehicle he used on the day in question was subsidised by the respondent. Regarding the requisition in question, he stated that Mr Gqizana signed it and he authorised it. The mileage and number of litres dispensed into the vehicle is known by the driver not him, and this would normally be after the fuel had been dispensed into the vehicle. He decided to fill up 5 X 25 litres as he did not know how much diesel the truck was going to use. He was going to take back whatever diesel was left. He also stated that there was nothing wrong with the manner in which he dealt with the matter.

He stated that on the day in question Mr Gqizana was working at Duncan Village and was not reporting to him. He therefore did not know what he was doing but later learnt that he was collecting refuse at Duncan Village. The requisition was with Mr Gqizana, as he was going to fill up at Chiselhurst and enter the mileage and litres of fuel dispensed. It is common practice to take diesel to the machines and TLBs that are on other sites. He failed to understand why the officers in question opted to arrest him instead of going and collecting the requisition from Mr Gqizana. He did not advise Mr Gqizana of what had happened, as he was in shock. He only advised him of the incident the following Monday, as he knew that there would be other people to assist him. He could not tell who assisted him, as he did not ask. Had he not been assisted he would have told him. He also stated that he found the truck on site full of  
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 6
rubbish. Mr Gqizana indicated that he could not go to the dumping site, as he did not get the diesel. He also advised him that the refuse in the truck was that of Saturday.

With regards to Mr Mtshengu's nervousness in the vehicle, he stated that he only made the link between such and the incident on the day in question after he was released from the police station. He denied that he advised Mr Mtshengu that he was taking the fuel to a TLB in Mdantsane.

At the disciplinary hearing he was represented by Mr Sogood, who is currently suspended. He also stated that it was the respondent's duty to call Mkosana as a witness at the disciplinary hearing. He also stated that Mr Gqizana could not testify on his behalf, as he was intimidated.

Second witness for the respondent was Mr Abner Gqizana, who after being duly sworn in testified as follows:

He works for the respondent as a truck driver and a supervisor of the Street Sweepers. When filling up their trucks they needed to get authorisation from their supervisors. At the depot they filled out the requisition themselves. On the day in question he requested diesel from the applicant. He filled in the requisition and he then went to fill up at Chiselhurst. He returned without filling the truck, as the Chiselhurst depot was closed. He requested the applicant to organise the diesel for him. He did not specify how many litres he needed but requested diesel that was going to take him through the weekend. The applicant failed to bring him such and on calling him later, he learnt that his phone was switched off. He decided not to do a lot of work as his truck could have stopped anytime. He also did not dump the refuse in his truck.

With regards to the procedural aspect he testified that the reason why he did not testify at the disciplinary hearing was because Mr Nyekisa advised him that he would be dismissed if he testified at such hearing. A few days later he was advised by Mr Apleni not to testify at the disciplinary hearing so that the applicant got dismissed. Most managers called him and said the same thing and as a result he decided not to testify, as he was scared he was going to be dismissed.

During cross-examination, he stated that the truck gauge was not working properly and as a result he did not know how much fuel was in the truck. On the day in question he was loading refuse and also supervising other employees. Mr Nyekisa was his DCO. He denied that he was doing drop off points. Answering a question on why he did not ask Mr Nyekisa to sign a requisition for him, he stated that Mr Nyekisa had nothing to do with authorising fuel. He decided to minimise his operations to save fuel. He also stated that he did not see the point in advising him of his situation, as he had already requested the fuel from the applicant. He again used the truck on Sunday even though it did not have fuel. He stated that he saw Mr Nyekisa on Sunday where they were working but decided not to bother him, as he had already finished his overtime. He was also hoping that the gauge was wrong.

On Monday after the incident the truck still had refuse from Saturday and Sunday. He advised the applicant of such after meeting him on site that Monday after he, the applicant, told him what happened to him.

Based on the above Mr Nikani submitted that the dismissal of the applicant was unfair and prayed that he be retrospectively reinstated.

That concluded the applicant's case.

Analysis of evidence and argument 
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 7
The applicant was charged with stealing 125 litres of diesel from the respondent. It is common cause that on the day of the incident 5 X 25 litres of diesel were found in the possession of the applicant. The question is what he intended to do with such.

According to the respondent, the applicant stole such fuel for his own benefit. The applicant denied this statement, stating that he was taking the fuel to a fellow employee, Mr Gqizana, who requested it for his truck.

The respondent's case is based on five witnesses' testimony. Mr Mtshengu's testimony that he was instructed to fill the containers for TLB's at Mdantsane was not disputed. His evidence that the applicant instructed him to offload some containers at his house was also not disputed. I therefore have no reason not to accept this testimony. The applicant's representative hammered on why Mr Mtshengu was not charged. I am satisfied with the respondent's answer as to why Mr Mtshengu was not charged. The applicant led evidence suggesting that Mr Mtshengu's conduct in the bakkie suggested that there was a conspiracy to dismiss him. Assuming that this is indeed true, I fail to understand why such statement was not put to Mr Mtshengu so he could answer to it.

It is common cause that the applicant did not have the requisition with him. Both Messrs Gola and Mtshengu testified that at no stage did the applicant indicate that the requisition was with Mr Gqizana. According to them, he indicated that he was going to write it out later. The applicant on the other hand testified that the requisition was with Mr Gqizana. The evidence before me suggests that on his way from Chiselhurst, Mr Gqizana requested the applicant to organise him fuel. Why would Mr Gqizana then leave with a requisition that he was not going to use?

Answering as to where the requisition was, Mr Gqizana stated that it was with the applicant. The applicant through body language indicated to Mr Gqizana that it was with him, the witness. Having cautioned the applicant, the witness changed his statement, stating that the requisition was with him and the requisition book with the applicant. I cannot help but to conclude that the applicant's conduct in this regard was that of a dishonest person. Further, had he advised the police officers as to where the requisition was, it is my finding that any reasonable person would have contacted Mr Gqizana to obtain such.

Considering the above, it is my finding that Mr Mtshengu dispensed fuel into the containers without the necessary requisition because of the trust he had on his supervisor. He had no reason to question him.

On the Monday after the incident the truck still had refuse from Saturday and Sunday. Mr Gqizana advised the applicant of such after meeting him on site that Monday after he, the applicant told him what happened to him. I need to state that the applicant on the other hand testified that he did not advise Mr Gqizana of what happened on the day in question. These statements are contradictory. Further, the applicant found himself in the situation in question because he was assisting Mr Gqizana. Evidently, any reasonable person would have advised him of the incident so that he could clear it up. The fact that he did not see any point of advising the most critical person of his situation suggests that Mr Gqizana was not involved in this matter.

Focusing on Mr Gqizana's testimony, he testified that he decided to work with the diesel he had in his truck even though it could have finished at any time, as he had requested it from the applicant. Answering as to why he did request the fuel from his DCO, he stated that he did not see the point, as he had already requested the fuel from the applicant. The fact that he did not approach his DCO shows that at no stage did he not work because he was out of fuel. Had he really been out of fuel, it is my finding that he would have approached his DCO for assistance. Working in the manner he alleged to have done is not convincing at all.

 
[2012] JOL 29633 (SALGBC) at 8

Dealing with the procedural aspect, the applicant's case is based on an allegation that the chairperson was biased. Such allegations were based on the fact that in her finding she indicated that she had consulted and the question was, with whom? The witness's answer in this regard was that she consulted authorities that were going to assist her in making an informed decision. I am therefore satisfied that the "consultation" in question had nothing to do with other people or the respondent's management. Witness

Mr Nikani also argued that there were aggravating circumstances from the respondent's prosecutor. The fact that there were none does not change the nature of the charges levelled against the applicant. They are serious in nature and any chairperson would have recommended dismissal.

Finding

Having considered the above, it is my finding that the dismissal of the applicant under the circumstances was reasonable and fair. Consequently, I make the following award:

Award

The applicant's dismissal is upheld.
I make no order as to costs.
Appearance:
Mr Tulani Nikani (At); Mr Elliot Nombila (R)


End of Document