



Dlamini / HT Group t/a Doves (Pty) Ltd [2002] 5 BALR 498 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: CCMA, Durban
Case No:  71-01
Date: 23/01/2002
Before: S Molony, Commissioner (CCMA)
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Fraud — Undertakers arranging funeral at discounted price, causing employer loss — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicants, both employees at a funeral parlour owned by the respondent, were dismissed for arranging a funeral for a family at a discounted price, causing the respondent loss. The applicants claimed that they had merely given the family a quotation while under the impression that the family was a member of a “funeral club” that entitled it to a discounted price.

The commissioner held that it was clear that the applicants had charged the family the discounted price, knowing that it was not entitled to a discount, and that the applicants had supplied a coffin, the cost of which they well knew exceeded the total price of the funeral. There was accordingly no doubt that they were guilty of fraud.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation

The arbitration took place on 14 August, 18 September, and 11 & 12 December 2001 at the offices of the CCMA in Durban. The applicants were represented by Mr Dlamini an official of PUSEMO, while the respondent was represented by Mr Reddy, who is the industrial relations manager.

Issue to be decided

At the commencement of the arbitration Mr Dlamini for the applicants placed two issues in dispute. He stated that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively unfair as the applicants did not defraud the company, and secondly they were not given the right to be represented at the hearing, as the person they chose who was a co-employee was used as an interpreter by the respondent. 

Mr Pillay for the respondent replied that the applicants did commit fraud and were dishonest and that a fair procedure was followed. The representative acted as an interpreter on the applicant’s request.

 
[2002] 5 BALR 498 (CCMA) at 499

As a result of the above, I then determined that the dispute was whether the dismissal of the applicants was fair, and in particular whether they committed fraud, and whether the use of the representative as an interpreter was unfair. 

Background to the dispute

The respondent company, Doves HTG, is a division of the HT Group (Pty) Ltd, and carries on business as funeral directors, with a regional office in Durban where the applicants where both employed.

The first applicant, Felix Dlamini, (referred to as Felix to avoid confusion) was employed on 1 August 1995, and was a funeral arranger at the time of his dismissal on 25 April 2001. He earned R1 885 per month at the time of his dismissal.

The second applicant, Frank Dlamini, (referred to as Frank) began his employment on 27 January 1988 and was dismissed on 7 May 2001. At the time of his dismissal he was a funeral manager and earned R3 570 per month.

It was agreed that the cases of the two applicants would be combined as the evidence was generally the same, and the applicants were dismissed for the same reason arising out of the same incident, although their roles were different. 

A bundle of documents was handed in by the respondent.

The dismissal of the applicants arose from an allegation of fraud and or dishonesty. The applicants were alleged to have conspired together to have arranged a funeral for the Mazibuko family, in respect of a Mr BS Mazibuko, for the sum of R3 410. The respondent alleged that the real price of the coffin supplied to the Mazibuko’s was in fact R4 500, and that the funeral cost R7 600.

Survey of evidence

The following is a summary of the 14 typewritten pages of evidence given in this matter. Unless otherwise indicated the evidence is common cause. I have attempted to set out the evidence in a chronological order.

The company experienced a loss due to shrinkage, and called in the services of an organisation called Whistle Blowers, part of Price Waterhouse Coopers, to investigate fraud within the company. This organisation received a number of calls, as did Mr Van Tonder, the regional manager, who received an anonymous fax implicating the applicants. As a result Mr Van Tonder instructed the branch manager Mr Mark Beukes to do spot checks. It was during one of these checks that the present incident came to light. 

On Tuesday 20 March 2001, Ms TR Mazibuko came to the Durban office and spoke to Felix about arranging the funeral of the deceased Mr Boyi Simon Mazibuko. In accordance with the usual procedure, Felix then completed a “funeral order form” which is a pre-printed A5 carbonised document with details on the front and small print contract on the back, and each form is numbered. The funeral order form for the Mazibuko funeral reflects the price of the funeral as R3 410, including a casket for R1 403,50. A number of disputes arose at this point. It was put to the respondent’s witnesses that the funeral order form was in fact a quote. The respondent’s witnesses stated that it was not a quote, it is a form used to arrange a funeral. Felix in his evidence stated that the form is  
[2002] 5 BALR 498 (CCMA) at 500
not a quotation, but he stated that the fact that the form is signed by the customer does not mean that it reflected the agreement between the parties, and that the form can be changed later if the family change their minds as happened in this case. 

A further dispute in the evidence arose out of the question of why the customer was given the price of R3 410. It was common cause that this price is a special price, given to members of funeral clubs only. The applicant’s evidence is that the customers were members of a funeral club. Felix stated that the family was a member of a funeral club, but that the club was not one which was affiliated to Doves. He was informed by Dolly, who I understand is the receptionist, at the outset that the family had a lapsed policy. He also agreed that he would need authority to give the special price and stated that he got this authorisation from Frank.

Felix did not complete the funeral order form, in that he did not place the stock code, which reflects the type of coffin, on the form. The respondent’s evidence was that it is necessary and usual to do so. Felix stated that the code was placed on the form only once the body is actually placed in the coffin, and he did not enter the number as the customer was not satisfied with the coffin.

The deceased was then placed in a pine coffin but moved into an imbuia coffin on Thursday 22 March by Mr Mkwanazi. His evidence was that he did so on the instructions of Felix, who told him that the pine coffin was wrong.

The family then returned to the funeral parlour on Thursday 22 March. According to Felix, the family then asked to see Frank, who informed him that the family now wanted an expensive coffin, which is confirmed by Frank. 

The amount of R3 410 was then paid by the customer TR Mazibuko, and a receipt then made out on 23 March 2001.

The original, first copy of the form was placed in the file opened by Felix in terms of company procedure. Mr Mark Beukes, on the instructions of Mr Van Tonder did an inspection by checking the information in the file with the coffin in which the deceased was in fact placed. He found that the deceased was in an imbuia coffin, whereas he should have been in a flat lid pine coffin which is the coffin used for the “special price funeral club” funerals. He also noted that there was no letter in the file showing that the deceased’s family belonged to a funeral club. Beukes also noted that on the funeral schedule, a document complied by Frank and kept on a board in Franks office, the Mazibuko coffin was noted as being an imbuia coffin. When he returned to Frank’s office after checking the coffins in the mortuary, the funeral schedule had been altered to read “F/L”, meaning “flat lid” coffin. Frank, according to his version having now discussed the matter with the family on the Thursday spoke to them again on the Friday when it was confirmed that they wanted the more expensive funeral. He got TR Mazibuko to sign an incomplete acknowledgement of debt form, and the deceased was removed and taken to the family.

As a result of this the applicants were called into the boardroom to discuss the matter with Van Tonder and Beukes.

There was a dispute as to when the funeral form was changed. Frank stated that he altered the copy of the funeral order form left in the book on Saturday 24 March. It is common cause that the form was changed by adding in an  
[2002] 5 BALR 498 (CCMA) at 501
amount of R3 600, and the words “IV I Imbuia”, and changing the total cost of the funeral to R7 671,32. The respondent’s version is that the changes to the form were probably made on the Friday.

The customer, TR Mazibuko then paid a sum of R4 261,32, being the balance of the funeral costs, on Saturday 24 March.

The procedure is that the deceased is placed in the coffin and is removed to the home of the family on a Friday afternoon. The respondent’s witnesses stated that the rule is that the deceased is not moved from the mortuary unless and until the funeral has been paid for in full. Van Tonder explained that the reason for this rule, which is that it was not possible to repossess the coffin once the funeral had taken place, and for that reason this rule is fundamental to the business. 

There was a dispute as to whether Frank could give a special price for a funeral. It was his defence that he had the required authority to give a special price. Van Tonder and Beukes stated that different levels of management could authorise greater amounts of discount. Frank stated that he could give a special price for a funeral and did not have to refer this to the branch manager for authorisation. This was disputed by the respondent’s witnesses. 

Evidence was also led on the allegation of procedural unfairness, but as this was not pursued I do not think it necessary to record the evidence. 

Analysis of the evidence

In order for the respondent to show that the applicants were dismissed for a fair reason, it must show that the applicants defrauded the company.

Fraud is the unlawful and intentional making of a misrepresentation which causes actual or potential prejudice to another. 

I need therefore to determine from the above evidence if the applicants misrepresented themselves. The following are my findings on the facts:

Felix gave the customer the special price on 20 March.
He did so without verifying that the customer was in fact a funeral club member.
The funeral form is what it purports to be – not a quotation, but a binding agreement entered into by the customer and, in this instance, Felix acting for and on behalf of the company.
By giving the customer the special price, Felix misrepresented himself and therefore the respondent. 
The agreement on 20 March was for a special funeral and this was the only agreement in existence until Friday 23 March when the customer actually paid the special price. 
Felix also misrepresented the agreement by ordering that the deceased be placed in the imbuia coffin on the Thursday when no changes to the agreement were made or authorised. I come to this finding because the evidence is that the form was changed on the Friday (according to the respondent) and on the Saturday (according to Frank).
Frank permitted the deceased, placed in the imbuia coffin, to be removed from the respondent’s premises on the Friday when the customer had not 

paid for such a funeral, which was not only contrary to the company rule but a misrepresentation of the agreement entered into between the parties at that stage.

The customer did not qualify for a special price, and when and only after this was picked up by Beukes, Frank changed the funeral order form.
The argument that Frank had the authority to give a special funeral is spurious and illogical, as it is common cause that the customer was not, in fact, given a special price at all. The evidence is that the new agreement (if one could call it that) for the imbuia coffin was only concluded on the Saturday, which was not only after the body was already moved, but after the discrepancy was noticed and the applicants were aware that Beukes and Van Tonder were now aware of the discrepancy. The respondent’s case was that I should draw an inference from circumstances, which was that the applicants intended to defraud the company, but having been found out, changed the agreement with the customer to what was actually arranged ie an imbuia coffin, not a special price pine coffin. In my view this conclusion is well founded on the above facts.

On the above findings it is clear that both the applicants committed fraud.

There is no other conclusion to be drawn, other than that the dismissal of the applicants was fair.

Award

The application is dismissed.

No cases were referred to in the above award.



End of Document