



Mabusela / Metropolitan Health [2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: KNPM1829-20
Date: 19/10/2020
Before: M Cowling, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Bringing employer’s name into disrepute — Employee dismissed for accusing employer of “forcing” employees to forfeit annual leave during national Covid-19 lockdown — Dismissal unfair.

Editor’s Summary


The respondent sent its entire workforce home after the national state of disaster was declared at the end of March 2020 to prevent the spread of the Covid-19 virus. Two days later, management realised that the company was regarded as an essential service, and advised all employees to return to work after the first weekend of the level 5 lockdown. The day before the lockdown, the applicant had been granted leave to attend a traditional ceremony in another province. During a flurry of messages between management and the employee, he sent a message on Twitter to the President and the police alleging that the respondent was forcing its employees to sacrifice their annual leave during the lockdown. The respondent viewed this as damaging to its reputation and dismissed the employee for bringing its name into disrepute. The applicant claimed that the dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair, claiming that he could not return to his workplace due to the lack of transport and restrictions on travel and that he had offered to work remotely from another office. The respondent contended that it was entitled to require all employees to resume work because they were on full pay and that deduction of annual leave for unauthorised absence was standard practice.

The Commissioner held that the applicant’s conduct had to be evaluated in the context in which it occurred, in particular the situation created by the declaration of the lockdown, which had confused the respondent’s management. The decision to close the operation had been reversed when the applicant found himself trapped in another province. It was understandable that the applicant had become frustrated by a predicament beyond his control. There was an element of truth to the Tweet because the respondent had clearly informed him that he would have to sacrifice his leave if he did not report for duty at his workstation. Furthermore, the Tweet had been posted for only two hours before the applicant was instructed to remove it, which he had done. Even if the posting of the Tweet amounted to misconduct, it was mitigated by the circumstances. Dismissal was, accordingly, an inappropriate sanction. 

The applicant was reinstated without back pay and subject to a final written warning.

 
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 143

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

[1]   Details of hearing and representation

This arbitration took place at the offices of the CCMA on 5 October 2020. 
The applicant was present and represented himself whereas the respondent was represented by Mr Gaven Shela (an attorney). 
The parties agreed to submit written closing arguments. I am indebted to them in this respect.

[2]   Issue to be determined

The applicant was found guilty of conducting himself in a manner that may have brought the respondent’s name into disrepute by posting a derogatory statement concerning the respondent on Twitter. The said statement stated that the respondent’s employees were being forced to return to work. This had the effect of damaging the reputation and brand of the respondent. 
A related aspect to this alleged misconduct is that by posting the said statement the applicant failed to follow internal grievance procedures. 

[3]   Background to the dispute

The applicant has been employed by the respondent with effect from 17 January 2013 and was a regional coordinator earning R15 515,22 per month at the time of his dismissal. 
It is common cause that the applicant needed to attend a traditional ceremony at his home in Nqamakwe (in the Transkei) on 26 and 27 March 2020. He duly applied for leave well in advance but it was only approved on Wednesday 25 March (ie the day before it was due to be taken) by Mr Streeni Pulliah (the regional manager) to whom the applicant reported. 
While approving the leave Mr Pulliah advised the applicant that the South African President had indicated that he intended declaring a Stage 5 lockdown which was due to commence with effect from Thursday 26 March (ie the following day) and hence that the applicant might experience transport problems returning from the Eastern Cape on Sunday 29 March 2020.
However the applicant was committed to travel since the traditional ceremony had been arranged well in advance and hence he departed for the Eastern Cape at midnight on Wednesday 25 March 2020. 
In the interim confusion reigned at the respondent where a complete shutdown was initially effected on 26 March 2020 as a result of the declaration of a State of Emergency and Stage 5 lockdown. This meant that employees were sent home on that day. 
However, the following day the respondent was advised that it had been designated as an essential service and hence all employees were advised to return to work on Monday 30 March 2020.  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 144
Owing to further confusion around this issue the respondent only succeeded in securing the return of all its employees by Wednesday 1 April 2020. Those employees who were not at work on Monday 30 or Tuesday 31 March were not penalised in any way by being compelled to take annual leave or salary deductions. 
On Sunday 29 March the applicant was unable to secure transport back to Pietermaritzburg and only managed to travel as far as Mthatha. Thereafter there was a flurry of messages and emails on various social platforms where the applicant was able to deduce that the respondent was unwilling to arrange transport for him to Pietermaritzburg. However, he was also advised that if he did not return to work he would have to take annual leave until that was exhausted where-after any further leave would be unpaid.
This prompted the applicant to send the Twitter message in order to seek clarity as he had heard a statement from the Minister of Employment and Labour to the effect that annual leave was not to be utilised when employees were unable to come to work during the Stage 5 lockdown.
The respondent viewed the sending of this Tweet as misconduct resulting in the bringing of the respondent’s name and brand into disrepute. As a result the applicant was dismissed. The applicant is challenging his dismissal as unfair and is seeking reinstatement. 

[4]   Procedural fairness

The applicant is not challenging the procedural fairness of the disciplinary enquiry that he attended.

[5]   Survey of evidence and argument

The respondent called two witnesses viz Mr Streeni Pulliah (Regional Manager to whom the applicant reported) and Ms Eunice August (Human Capital Business Partner). Mr Pulliah testified that, from the respondent’s perspective, a considerable amount of uncertainty characterised the onset of the Covid-19 lockdown which commenced on 26 March 2020. At the outset the respondent granted a leave of absence to all high risk employees. 
At that stage the respondent had not received a mandate from its client (GEMS) to close the offices. However, the following day (ie 26 March) the respondent did receive such a mandate to close the office which was implemented over Thursday 26 and Friday 27 March 2020.
At this stage the applicant had already been advised by Mr Pulliah of the risks associated with inter-provincial travel but had nonetheless decided to take the leave and travel to the Eastern Cape on the night of the 25/26 March. However on 27 March the respondent advised that it had been accorded essential services status and hence all employees were advised to return to work. On Saturday 28 March Mr Pulliah sent a WhatsApp message to all Regional Coordinators (including the applicant) informing them that, since they had laptops, they could continue working from home.  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 145
The applicant replied on 29 March to the effect that his laptop was at the office in Pietermaritzburg whereas he was in the Eastern Cape. At this stage he was still on leave and hence this did not appear to be an issue.
In order for employees to return to work they needed to be issued with essential services permits which also posed logistical problems for the applicant. Once the certificate had been issued the question of returning to work from the perspective of the respondent was now considered to be an instruction which needed to be obeyed. By Tuesday 31 March all the other branch managers and regional coordinators had returned to work – other than the applicant.
On 30 March Mr Pulliah contacted the applicant and informed him that he must return to work immediately and if he could not make it he must take annual leave. The applicant replied that he was experiencing transport problems due to a prohibition on interprovincial travel. Mr Pulliah responded by informing the applicant that he had warned him about the risks of interprovincial travel and that if he is unable to return by Wednesday 1 April he will have to utilise his annual leave as this was what was being consistently applied across the board by the respondent to all its employees.
According to Mr Pulliah, it was at this stage that the applicant posted the Tweet to the presidency and SAPS to the effect that employees were being forced to return to work and, if unable, they must apply for annual leave. Mr Pulliah stated that the applicant’s intention in this regard was derogatory and malicious as he never waited to hear how this process would pan out. His malicious intention was illustrated by the use of the word “forced” since this was untrue and nobody was being forced to return. Instead they were expected to return in accordance with their ordinary employment contract and the respondent has a policy to the effect that failure to come to work must be mitigated through the taking of annual leave.
In regard to the impact of the applicant’s Tweet on the respondent, Mr Pulliah stated that the contract with GEMS had been reduced from a 2 year contract to one that was renewed annually which meant that the respondent was more vulnerable. In this regard he submitted that the Tweet was hugely damaging as it created a negative perception that adversely affected the respondent’s brand. This could influence GEMS negatively in regard to the renewal of the contract.
In this regard the respondent’s Social Media Policy stipulates that all employees understand that the nature of their relationship with the respondent makes them the face and brand ambassadors of the latter and therefore business communication must be managed appropriately. In addition, the Code of Ethics promotes ethical business practices and a commitment to ethical standards. It includes an undertaking not to engage in malicious activity that might harm the reputation of the respondent. Mr Pulliah was of the opinion that the applicant’s malicious intent was manifested by the fact that he had ignored the existing grievance procedure and had “jumped the gun” by resorting to social platforms such as  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 146
  Twitter which meant that the issue was being exposed to the world at large. 
In cross-examination Mr Pulliah stated that, since all employees were on full pay (even when they had been ordered to stay at home when the respondent initially closed down due to the lockdown) they could summarily be ordered to return once the respondent had been designated as an essential service. 
Mr Pulliah also denied that the regional coordinators could work from an alternative office as they needed to be in their respective offices in order to provide hands-on supervision to subordinates, order stationery and food supplies through the use of a company credit card which all regional coordinators had in their possession. Thus, Mr Pulliah confirmed that it was not possible for the applicant to work from the Mthatha or East London offices if he was unable to return to Pietermaritzburg.
Mr Pulliah concluded by testifying that he empathised with the applicant that he was expected to either report for work or take annual leave but this reflected the policies that were in place within the respondent at that time.
Ms Eunice August (Human Capital Business Partner) confirmed Mr Pulliah’s testimony regarding the content and the effect of the social media policy – especially the provision relating to the fact that all employees have a responsibility to protect the respondent’s brand. This can be contrasted with the actions of the applicant when he tweeted derogatory remarks about the respondent as all Twitter account holders will have access to the Tweet which was posted for a period of 2 hours.
Ms August also testified that she sent the applicant’s Essential Services Permit to him via email and WhatsApp and hence the applicant would have been permitted to travel back to Pietermaritzburg in order to continue working. However, a question remains as to whether this would apply to inter-provincial travel. 
She also emphasised that the respondent had a grievance procedure in place where the first step was to raise a grievance with the employees’ immediate supervisor where-after it would be escalated to higher levels. In this regard she submitted that the applicant had completely ignored the grievance procedure in two respects. The first is that he sent a WhatsApp to Mr Kobus Dreyer (Chief Operations Officer) at 12:19pm on 31 March 2020. This was in contravention of the grievance policy where Mr Dreyer could only be approached as a last resort and not in the first instance – as occurred in this case. 
The second aspect is that, after not receiving a response to this WhatsApp the applicant tweeted the presidency and SAPS barely an hour later. Ms August submitted that the applicant should instead have attempted to resolve these issues internally without resorting to a social media platform such as Twitter. 
In cross-examination Ms August conceded that she was telephonically contacted by the applicant on Tuesday 31 March where the latter was requesting the respondent to provide transport in order to enable him to travel back from the Eastern Cape to Pietermaritzburg so that he could  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 147
  resume working. The applicant further informed her during this conversation that the reason he needed transport was because there was no transport operating at that stage due to the lockdown.
However, Ms August responded by stating that the respondent lacked any policy regarding provision of transport in these circumstances and hence it was incumbent upon the applicant to secure his own transport back to Pietermaritzburg. She further added that if the applicant was unable to return he would have to utilise his annual leave. As far as she understood the situation at that stage, he was unable to claim UIF as he had not been unemployed for 14 days. She also stated that these policies applied in respect of all employees throughout the respondent. 
The applicant testified that when he went on authorised leave on Thursday 26 March 2020 he had every intention of returning to work on Monday 30 March but was unable to do so due to the unavailability of transport as a result of the lockdown. On Thursday 26 (when he was already in the Eastern Cape) he was notified by his colleagues that the respondent had closed down. However, on Saturday 28 March he received a WhatsApp from Mr Pulliah stating that all regional coordinators must report for duty on Monday 30 March. 
As a result of his inability to secure transport the applicant suggested that he operate from either the Mthatha or East London offices. This was rejected by the respondent.
The applicant was concerned about the possibility of losing his annual leave and therefore being compelled to take unpaid leave as a result of this situation which was beyond his control. He also recalled an announcement by the Minister of Employment and Labour to the effect that employees who were unable to work due to the lockdown should not be compelled to take annual leave. 
He became frustrated when Ms August informed him that the respondent would not organise transport for him since he heard of a case in Klerksdorp where transport had been arranged for an employee to return to Klerksdorp, where the office where he is employed is located, after burying his sister in Johannesburg. Thus, amidst all these mixed messages and confusion, the applicant desperately sought clarity and hence at 12:19pm, when he was in Mthatha, he sent a WhatsApp message to Mr Kobus Dreyer (the Chief Operations Officer) stating that the regional coordinators are being forced to return to work and those who cannot make it are being forced to take annual leave. He then suggested that he needed to clarify the situation with the Presidency since he understood that agreement over this issue had been reached between government and big business. He further stated that he was requesting clarity via Twitter “as that is the only platform that is quick”. He concluded by texting that “this is not about bad mouthing the company but seeking help.” He also forwarded this WhatsApp to Mr Banile Mzolisa (head of department). 
When he received no response to this WhatsApp he decided to send the Tweet to the presidency and SAPS as well as to the twitter handle MoMMetza. This occurred at 2:04pm on Tuesday 31 March. 
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 148
The outcome of this was that the applicant had now effectively informed the world at large that “employees are being forced to return to work and if they can’t they must apply for annual leave.” He followed this up with a Tweet posted at 2:45pm stating that those employees “who were released to go home are also told to apply for annual leave what is the agreement between the Government, labour and business? Why must employees apply for annual leave?” 
Shortly after the posting of the Tweets the applicant received a call from Mr Nathan Pillay (head of Human Resources) who informed him of the Social Media Policy and instructed him to delete the tweet immediately. The applicant inquired as to the consequences if he refused and Mr Pillay responded by informing the applicant that he (ie Mr Pillay) would be forced to institute disciplinary action. The applicant thereafter deleted the tweets but informed Mr Pillay that he was not happy about doing so as his concerns had still not been addressed.
In cross-examination the applicant denied that he was advised by Mr Pulliah that he would be taking a risk by travelling to the Eastern Cape at that stage. He also stated that he had not received the essential services permit on Sunday 29 March but conceded that it was sent to him on Monday 30 March 2020. The reason why he suggested that he work out of the Mthatha office while he was in possession of a permit was due to the absence of transport to return to Pietermaritzburg.
The applicant conceded that the respondent did not have a policy dealing with transport back to the work place after an employee had been on leave. He also stated that, in his opinion, his presence at the office was not necessary and hence there was nothing to prevent him from working out of the Mthatha office. He disagreed that the first step in the process of attempting to resolve this issue should have been that he applied for leave as he only had 5 days annual leave remaining. 
The applicant also acknowledged that the WhatsApp message to Mr Kobus Dreyer and Mr Banile Mzolisa was not in conformity with the respondent’s grievance procedure. It was put to him in this regard that this was the reason why neither of the two responded. 
His cross-examination concluded by denying that he intended any harm by sending the tweets but conceded that there was a potential for harm – particularly because he stated that employees were being forced. However he explained this on the basis that English is not his first language and so therefore his use of language might not have been appropriate.

[6]   Analysis of evidence and argument

Mr Shela submitted that the applicant is clearly guilty of a contravention of the Social Media Policy as well as the Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct Policy in that he engaged in malicious activity that had the potential to harm the reputation of the respondent and to bring the latter’s brand into disrepute. 
This occurred as a result of the Tweets that he sent where his reference to employees being forced to return to work would obviously have a negative  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 149
  impact on the image of the respondent. This is further exacerbated by the fact that by, resorting to the Twitter facility, the applicant was ensuring that the message would be broadcast as widely as possible. This was particularly as a result of the Twitter accounts to which he directed the Tweets. 
Mr Shela further emphasised that the applicant was under a fiduciary duty to protect the respondent’s interests. Since the latter’s core business is that of a financial services provider he submitted that it operated in a “highly competitive environment” with an extremely high potential for financial and reputational damage. The applicant was aware of this but chose to ignore the possible consequences of his conduct.
However, the applicant’s conduct needs to be evaluated within the context in which it occurred. In the first place, it must be noted that this incident occurred within what can be described as a unique situation when, for the first time in the history of the country, President Ramaphosa declared a lockdown in order to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic. This required the government to formally declare a state of disaster in terms of the Disaster Management Act. 
It is clearly apparent from the testimony of all the witnesses at this hearing that, at the time of the declaration of lockdown, confusion reigned within the respondent. This was not unusual as judicial notice can be taken of the fact that the entire world was thrown into a state of confusion as a result of this pandemic. This was particularly because the world had never experienced an event like this on such a grand scale.
This confusion within the respondent is clearly apparent from the chain of emails between the relevant role-players (such as Mr Pulliah and Ms August) as well as their conduct. Thus, on Thursday 26 March a decision was made to close down the respondent’s operations in accordance with the lockdown but this had to be reversed when the respondent was accorded essential services status.
This in itself must have been highly confusing to employees since they were initially instructed to stay at home and thereafter ordered to return to work. In addition there was confusion about who should return to work and who should stay at home as a result of being at risk due to co-morbidities. At this stage the applicant’s situation is that he found himself trapped in the Eastern Cape without any transport back to Pietermaritzburg. Irrespective of whether he was warned of the risks by Mr Pulliah, the fact remains that his leave had been approved and hence he was entitled to travel to the Eastern Cape in order to perform a traditional ceremony that had been arranged at least a month prior to the occasion.
It was thus understandable that the applicant would become frustrated at his predicament which was beyond his control. This was particularly because rumours were rife about the impact of the lockdown on the workplace and whether employees would continue to be paid after the closing down of companies. These rumours included employees being able to claim unemployment insurance through UIF as well as various subsidy schemes that the Government intended introducing.  
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 150
And yet, amidst all this confusion, the only response that the applicant received from the respondent was that he would have to utilise his annual leave (in respect of which he had already made plans) if he was unable to return to his work station due to the absence of transport from the Eastern Cape.
Mr Shela has argued that the action that the applicant resorted to by posting the tweets was drastic and that he is in violation of the respondent’s Social Media Policy as well as the Code of Ethics. This is exacerbated by the language used – particularly where he stated that employees were being forced to return to work. 
However, in the applicant’s case, there is an element of truth to the content of this Tweet since, although it was impossible for him to return to his workplace due to circumstances that were not his fault, he would nonetheless forfeit his annual leave. Therefore, from a strictly technical point-of-view it could be said that employees were being forced to return to work.
The applicant also explained that the use of the work “force” must be evaluated within the light of the fact that English is not his first language. In this latter respect the meaning of the Tweet would have taken on a different characteristic if the applicant had used the word “compelled” instead of “forced”.
The final issue in this regard is the telephone conversation between the applicant and Mr Pillay shortly after the Tweet was sent. The applicant states Mr Pillay informed him that if he did not delete the Tweet disciplinary action would be taken. The applicant took this to mean that he would not be disciplined if he did this and, as a result, he deleted the Tweets shortly thereafter. This means that the Tweets remained posted for a period of approximately 2 hours. 
During the hearing there was considerable debate over the relevance and weight of Mr Pillay’s testimony. He was not called as a witness and there was a dispute over precisely what he said to the applicant in this regard. When the applicant was notified of the pending disciplinary action, he sent Mr Pillay an email pointing out that the latter had been informed that he would not be disciplined if he deleted the Tweet which he did. He further put Mr Pillay on direct terms to state whether or not he had said this. Mr Pillay’s response was not a categorical denial and was extremely garbled which seemed to indicate that the applicant was telling the truth. 
This raises the question as to how much weight should be attached to this bearing in mind that this is hearsay evidence and account also needs to be taken of whether or not Mr Pillay in his capacity as head of HR has the authority to bind the respondent in this regard.
Taking the above issues into account I am of the opinion that Mr Pillay’s testimony can only be utilised as a factor to indicate that the applicant’s conduct, in his opinion was not considered sufficiently serious to justify dismissal since the head of HR had informed him that no disciplinary action would be taken if he withdrew the tweet which is what he did. 
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 151
Therefore, although the applicant was guilty of some form of misconduct by posting the Tweet, I find that this is mitigated by the surrounding circumstances of the applicant’s situation at the time of the posting. In addition, Mr Shela’s contention that the applicant was motivated by malice has not been substantiated by the facts. 
Instead, I conclude that the applicant’s contention in his written closing arguments to the effect that he was motivated by a need to seek clarity on this issue is the more probable. He further argued that he never entertained an intention to harm the business and submitted that the respondent was refusing to come to the party despite the fact that all role players were facing a unique situation. There is no reason for me not to accept these submissions and I find that they are strong mitigating factors.
The applicant’s use of language was unfortunate but it needs to be viewed within the context which it occurred as well as the fact that English is not the applicant’s mother tongue. 
Seen in this light I am of the opinion that dismissal is not an appropriate sanction in this particular case for the above reasons. Additional mitigating factors are that the applicant has 12 years’ service with the respondent and that he supplemented the initial tweet with an explanation in terms of a query about the respondent’s Policy regarding annual leave during the lockdown. 
Mr Shela has also argued that the respondent’s Social Media Policy and the Code of Ethics made provision for dismissal for any contravention. However, a reading of these policies clearly indicates that dismissal is not mandatory but contingent upon discretion to take disciplinary action which may result in dismissal.
As a result, I find that the applicant is guilty of misconduct in the form of posting the tweet that essentially concerned internal issues and the use of somewhat intemperate language that had the potential to cast the respondent in a bad light. He resorted to posting the tweet as a first instance rather than as a matter of last resort after exhausting internal grievance procedures. However, this conduct, given the applicant’s intention together with the fact that it has a whistleblowing quality to it, does not justify dismissal.
Hence the dismissal is found to be unfair and is to be substituted with a Final Written Warning valid for 12 months to take effect from 31 March 2020 when the offence was committed. In addition the applicant will not be entitled to any back-pay which can be instead considered to be a penalty in the form of unpaid suspension for the period for which he was not working.

[7]   Order

The applicant’s dismissal is hereby found to be unfair and he is to be reinstated on the same terms and conditions as existed prior to his dismissal. 
The applicant is not entitled to be paid any back-pay. 
[2021] 2 BALR 142 (CCMA) at 152
The applicant’s reinstatement is subject to him being issued with a final written warning valid for 12 months with effect from 31 March 2020.
The applicant is to report for duty on Monday 2 November 2020.

No cases were referred to in the above award.



End of Document