



SDTU obo Matou &Etson / Garden Pavilion (Pty) Ltd [2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA)
Judgments Online

Division: Cape Town
Case No: WE 11918-08 /  WE11916-08
Hearing Date(s): 10 / 11 / 2008, 5 / 12 / 2008
Award Date(s): 12 / 12 / 2008
Before: Crafford


Keywords


Labour Law — dismissal for dishonesty
Labour Law — substantive and procedural fairness — onus of proof lies with employer

Mini Summary


The applicants ,who were employed by the respondent since 15 September 1997 as a receiving/ despatch clerk and a sales assistant, respectively, were both dismissed on 3 September 2008.

They were dismissed on the grounds of dishonesty relating to the unauthorised removal of company property.

The issue in dispute was whether the dismissal of the applicants had been procedurally and substantively fair.

The applicants alleged that their dismissal had been procedurally unfair based on the contention that did not know that they had been suspended. The evidence presented by the respondent revealed that there was no reason not to believe that the applicants had been given reasons for this verbally.

Evidence further revealed that the respondent had discharged the onus of establishing the applicants' misconduct, on a balance of probabilities. The relationship of trust between the respondent and the applicants had been severed as a result of their misconduct.

Held that the dismissal of the applicants was both procedurally and substantively fair.

The case was dismissed with no order as to costs.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 1

CRAFFORD

Particulars of proceedings and representation

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 2

[1]    Separate Con/arb's were scheduled on 6 October 2008 at the Suiderstrand Library, Strand for Applicant, R Matou and Applicant, A Etson. However, it was established that the Applicants were party to the same incident with the respondent and hence the matters were consolidated and heard as one, as acknowledged and agreed by the parties. As the conciliation was unsuccessful, the matter proceeded to arbitration and was part heard. It was then scheduled for 10 November 2008. Due to the applicant party requiring a Xhosa Interpreter to be called to the proceedings, the matter remained part heard and concluded on 5 December 2008. The parties requested that written closing arguments be presented, which was granted and agreed to be in by Friday, 12 December 2008.

[2]    The applicants, Ms R Matou ("Matou") and Ms A Etson ("Etson") were represented by Mr R Barties ("Barties"), an official of SDTU. The respondent, Garden Pavilion (Pty) Ltd ("GP") was represented by Mr S Raubenheimer ("Raubenheimer"), an official of ESOSA.

[3]    The respondent party called 4 witnesses and the applicant party 1 witness.

[4]    The proceedings were digitally recorded and the parties testified under oath.

[5]    The respondent party submitted a bundle, paginated 1 – 21. The applicants' representative made reference to Matou and Etson's disciplinary notices, which although were not submitted, were reflected on pages 1 and 11 of the respondent's bundle.

The issue in dispute

[6]    I am required to determine whether the dismissal of Matou and Etson was procedurally and substantively fair on the grounds of gross dishonesty for unauthorised removal of company property.

The background to the dispute

[7]    The respondent, GP, whose business is in the retail nursery (plants) sector, employed both Matou as a Receiving/Dispatch Clerk and Etson as a Sales Assistant from 15 September 1997 until their services were terminated on 3 September 2008. Matou earned R3 600 per month and Etson earned R4 450 per month.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 3

Survey of evidence and argument

Respondent’s evidence and argument

[8]    In opening, Raubenheimer stated that an employee, Ms Susan Engelbrecht ("Engelbrecht") was found guilty of theft. During her disciplinary inquiry Engelbrecht implicated Matou and Etson participating over an extensive period in theft activities, which included plants, chips and/or cool drinks. Raubenheimer continued that Matou and Etson were then suspended pending an investigation. Both were then notified of their disciplinary inquiries commencing 22 August 2008. Raubenheimer said that both applicants agreed to undertake a polygraph test, however only Etson did so as Matou was pregnant at the time. He continued that Etson failed the polygraph.

[9]    Raubenheimer said that the respondent would show that procedural and substantive requirements were followed in terms of Schedule 8 of The Labour Relations Act of 1995 as amended ("The Act"). Further, the respondent would make out its case on three aspects; suffering financial losses over an extended period; eye witness testimony of the applicants' participation (in such activities) and corroborating evidence via polygraph testing.

[10]    Raubenheimer mentioned for noting that two other employees were also implicated by Engelbrecht in such activities, who were subsequently dismissed. However, both these employees had not referred disputes.

[11]    Raubenheimer requested that the applicants' cases be dismissed and a cost order against SDTU be considered for these referrals.

[12]    The first witness, Mr Colin M Clegg ("Clegg"), a Director for GP, testified that there had been shortages in the business for the last three years and an Accountant, Mr Keith Jones ("Jones") was employed. Jones identified that stock shortages were occurring, which were particularly bad for the year ending June 2008. He continued that Jones was of the view that pilfering was taking place. Clegg had requested that an investigation into this matter take place.

[13]    Clegg said that on 10 August 2008 there was an incident where plant material and hardware were stolen, despite a strict selling product procedure. He stated that a colleague had called in to report removed company products without documentation. Engelbrecht was identified as the person responsible. Clegg said that when confronted, Engelbrecht admitted guilt of theft of the goods and confirmed that others were also involved, including Matou and Etson. Engelbrecht had promised at this time that she would provide details of their participation in these activities.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 4

[14]    Clegg said during Engelbrecht's disciplinary hearing, the items stolen were verified from the stock schedule. He continued that Matou and Etson were subsequently dismissed, in addition to Engelbrecht and two others. He continued that Engelbrecht had testified in the inquiries of the four employees dismissed, including that of Matou and Etson.

[15]    Clegg stated that the (diminished) stock loss situation since June 2008 resulted in improved cash flow and at present stock losses are at a minimal to zero level. Clegg confirmed that the respondent had followed the correct procedures as shown in the respondent's bundle.

[16]    Under cross examination, Clegg reconfirmed that Engelbrecht implicated Matou and Etson at her own disciplinary inquiry and that Engelbrecht's testimony during Matou and Etson's hearings correlated with GP's stock losses. In addition, Clegg stated that Matou and Etson during Monday and Friday meetings were regularly informed about stock losses occurring.

[17]    Clegg said that Matou and Etson's charges did not specify what and where company property was removed to at the time as GP still had to carry out its investigation. He continued that it would not be difficult for Matou and Etson to prepare for their disciplinary inquiries based on the charges stated.

[18]    Clegg confirmed that he did not directly witness Matou and Etson stealing during their employ; however he was aware that another employee, Pino, did witness this.

[19]    Clegg indicated that the disciplinary inquiry resumed after the polygraph test was administered, when the results were made known and that the polygrapher was not present at the inquiry. He further acknowledged that Matou and Etson's dismissals were based in the main on Engelbrecht's evidence.

[20]    As to Barties assertion that if Engelbrecht can't prove in testimony that Matou and Etson were guilty of theft, they did not do so, Clegg responded that it was corroborated by polygraph results for Etson and that he disagreed with Barties assertion.

[21]    Clegg continued that all his employees commence duties at 8am and on Saturdays and Public Holidays from 9am, with shifts ending at 6pm, (including that of Engelbrecht) and 5pm on Sundays and Public Holidays, however if raining or quiet employees may leave earlier. Clegg said it is possible to observe an employee leaving the premises at the end of a work period. Clegg said that  
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 5
whilst he is unable to show the stock losses right away, he could provide the stock sheets indicating this if required.

[22]    In regard to Engelbrecht's previous dismissal by the former owner, Clegg indicated that it was not for theft but insolence, and that she had been reinstated based on a CCMA award.

[23]    Clegg acknowledged that Matou and Etson's alleged offences were not specifically identified in their suspension or disciplinary notices.

[24]    Under re examination, Clegg confirmed handing the suspension and disciplinary notices to Matou and Etson, who had refused to sign it. He continued that neither Matou nor Etson queried or questioned anything relating to these notices. Clegg further reconfirmed that there were stock losses prior to Matou and Etson's inquiries and dismissals, which ceased thereafter.

[25]    Clegg confirmed that he was present when the Chair sanctioned and explained Matou and Etson's dismissals.

[26]    The second witness, Mr Gary Hewitt ("Hewitt"), the Managing Member of Polygraph and Integrity assessments testified that his primary function is to conduct polygraph examinations and forensic assessments by means of interviews, psychometric testing and scientific contents analysis. Hewitt indicated that he held a BA degree in Criminology and is a trained polygrapher and had conducted in excess of 4000 polygraphs to date.

[27]    Hewitt confirmed not conducting a polygraph test on Matou as she was pregnant at the time and this was in line with International requirements (standards). He did however test Etson and found her to be deceptive when answering the relevant pre explained questions by means of the validated international AF modified general questions technique as reflected in the respondents bundle. Hewitt indicated that the latest research rated this test to be 98% accurate.

[28]    Under cross examination, Hewitt said nothing in life is 100% accurate and that a 98% accuracy is significant. He responded that if a polygraph instrument was faulty he would not be able to get into its programmes, and which had not occurred with Etson. He continued that if the polygraph instrument malfunctions a polygraph test will not materialise or be able to indicate that a testee is being deceptive, because he as the tester makes a conclusion based on deception shown.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 6

[29]    The third witness, Mr H B Du Toit ("Du Toit"), the chair of the Disciplinary inquiry, testified that he recommended the dismissal of Matou and Etson based on the holistic evidence before him. He further stated the procedures followed were compliant (to the law).

[30]    Under cross examination Du Toit acknowledged that the applicant's notice of inquiry did not detail (specifically) the alleged offences. He further said that the Supervisor, Pino stated that Engelbrecht testified that those involved in the dishonesty, included Matou and Etson. Du Toit further confirmed that Engelbrecht was also involved in dishonesty on Sunday, 10 August 2008. Du Toit confirmed that Engelbrecht testified during her disciplinary inquiry that Matou and Etson were involved in dishonesty over an extended period of time.

[31]    Du Toit confirmed that the disciplinary findings had been explained to the applicants verbally, as reflected in the respondents bundle, based on evidence of the applicants' involvement and on the balance of probability. Du Toit acknowledged that Engelbrecht was not able to specify exact dates and times of the applicants' involvement in dishonesty, as it happened over an extended period of time. Du Toit acknowledged that if someone has stolen he/she may probably lie too. He conceded that when Engelbrecht admitted to stealing company products, as she was caught out, her testimony could possibly be suspect. Du Toit, however, stated that he had considered all the evidence including that of Matou and Etson (being two of the five involved.)

[32]    Under re examination, Du Toit said that the disciplinary inquiry minutes of Matou and Etson were not verbatim notes.

[33]    The fourth witness, Ms Susan Engelbrecht, (Engelbrecht) testified that she had worked for GP as a Cashier / Sales lady for four years, but no longer worked for GP as she had been caught stealing and was subsequently dismissed.

[34]    Engelbrecht continued that Matou and Etson worked with her over this period in other sections of Sales. Engelbrecht said that she, together with Matou, Etson, "Lusta" and "Cornelia", knowingly as friends, stole from GP regularly, over a period of approximately three years. She continued that they (the five of them) discussed and displayed the stolen product amongst themselves and had collectively stolen from GP.

[35]    Engelbrecht said that the items stolen included pots, plants and what one was in need of, such as cool drinks, ice cream, chips, seed, and poison etcetera. She said that they had typical workplace tiffs  
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 7
(arguments) amongst themselves which would come and go, but it (such arguments) did not endure (for long) or were of a permanent nature, as they were friends.

[36]    Engelbrecht said that after she was dismissed Matou only contacted her once to tell her about "Lusta" and "Cornelia". Engelbrecht said that during her disciplinary inquiry when she had testified about "Lusta" and "Cornelia", Clegg had asked her after her dismissal if others were involved in dishonesty. She said that it was at this stage she had told Clegg about Matou and Etson and had not been coerced into testifying against Matou and Etson. Engelbrecht stated she was well aware that she will not get her job back and had no reason to lie in her testimony. She further confirmed that GP's staff knew that they must not steal from the company.

[37]    Under cross examination, Engelbrecht said that she and Etson had had regular problems and then Etson would complain about this and report it to the office. However, she still got along with Etson despite their “tiffs” as it was always over quickly. Engelbrecht continued that Etson is bossy and exaggerated issues which would land one in the office, which would be dealt with by the management (Mr or Mrs Clegg) and which happened over a period of time.

[38]    Engelbrecht said that prior to Etson's leave during 2008, Mrs Clegg, who is a Christian, called both her (Engelbrecht) and Etson into the office to discuss/resolve their relationship (with each other) in a Christian fashion, namely how to interact with each other. Engelbrecht said that she had possibly been over to Etson's home prior to the Clegg's take over, once. She continued that she, Matou, and Etson left work at different times, however there were times that they had left with each other (same time) and recalled that she had probably taken a lift with Etson on one occasion.

[39]    Engelbrecht confirmed that she, Matou and Etson had left work earlier on a regular basis with Clegg's permission (as he was good to them).

[40]    Engelbrecht acknowledged that she had worked for the respondent for 3 years and not 4 as earlier stated and had made a mistake. She further acknowledged that – GP's Plant Manager was the applicants' complainant at their disciplinary inquiries; that the investigation into the applicants' alleged dishonesty was the respondent's decision; that Matou and Etson cannot blame Engelbrecht if the respondent did not properly investigate what she said about the applicants and that if anything was unclear about Engelbrecht's information regarding Matou and Etson, GP should have approached Engelbrecht to verify this.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 8

[41]    Engelbrecht agreed that Pino's testimony during Matou and Etson's hearings related only to Engelbrecht's stealing on Sunday, 10 August 2008. However, she said that despite differences or arguments, which were not serious, between her and Etson, they stole collectively.

[42]    Engelbrecht said that the manner in which product was removed was to take it to the office at the tills or to put it in one's handbag. She continued that this was easily observable as they were always in close proximity (of each other). Engelbrecht said that the last time Etson dishonestly removed GP's product from its premises included plants, a solar light and seed. Engelbrecht said that they, including herself, stole on an ongoing basis and that as such, times, dates and product over the full period cannot be specifically recalled.

[43]    Engelbrecht said that the theft of 10 August 2008 excluded Matou and Etson, but included herself, “Lusta”, “Cornelia” and a lady, “Vanessa” who had resigned. She acknowledged that GP and herself could not prove the dates, times and product allegedly dishonestly removed by the applicants.

[44]    Engelbrecht said that she is to be believed as they stole collectively as she is testifying truthfully. She confirmed that Matou and Etson's involvement in stealing was not disclosed during her own inquiry.

[45]    Under re examination, Engelbrecht said she observed Matou and Etson stealing as they did it together. She continued that if the applicants' testified that they did not steal they would be lying.

[46]    Respondent's closing argument was submitted in writing and was accordingly considered.

Applicant's evidence and argument

[47]    In opening, Barties stated that the applicants never at any stage stole and Matou and Etson will testify never being called by management that it is suffering losses. It will also be proved that the person guilty of stealing has fabricated the claim that Matou and Etson had been party to the stealing as she is unable to specify or give examples of days, dates and times and as she left the premises when going off duty earlier than Matou and Etson.

[48]    Barties said that the respondent's case is based on circumstantial evidence, not direct evidence. The polygraph results were not mentioned during the disciplinary inquiry to support the respondent's case and requested that the applicants be retrospectively reinstated.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 9

[49]    The first witness, Mr Eric Pino (Pino), the Plant Manager / Supervisor for GP stated as reflected in the minute of his testimony at the applicants' inquiries, (that the applicants' inquiries) did not relate to Engelbrecht's theft of GP's products on Sunday, 10 August 2008. Pino continued that as a result of Engelbrecht's disclosure of other staff's involvement, "Lusta" and "Cornelia" were subsequently disciplined. He confirmed that during their disciplinary inquiries, Engelbrecht disclosed that Matou and Etson were also involved over a period of time that did not pertain to the weekend of 10 August 2008.

[50]     Pino said that he could not confirm that the disciplinary notices of the applicants' did not allege in detail the exact product that they dishonestly removed from GP's premises. Pino said that he does not have knowledge if reasons were conveyed to Matou and Etson for their dismissals.

[51]    Pino said he was the author of the applicant's disciplinary notices and confirmed that Etson, during her disciplinary inquiry, admitted to stealing from the previous owner.

[52]    Etson, who on mutual agreement testified collectively on behalf of herself and Matou stated that she had never stolen with Engelbrecht from GP and that they worked in different departments. Etson said that although she was contracted as a Sales Assistant, she also performed managerial / supervisory tasks and overseeing the tills.

[53]    Etson confirmed that Engelbrecht always left at 5:30pm to catch the train, whilst she finished her shift at 6pm. She continued that she had never left work with Matou and or Engelbrecht and had never stolen anything from the previous and current employer.

[54]    Etson said that her conclusion of Engelbrecht's testimony about her and Matou's stealing is that Engelbrecht must have been paid to do this. Etson continued that she could not have stolen with Engelbrecht as she had never seen Engelbrecht and the others stealing at work.

[55]    Etson said that she did not understand both her and Matou's disciplinary notices at all and that they were told to seek clarity at their hearings. Etson continued that her and Engelbrecht's relationship was not good (niks lekker nie) as Engelbrecht manipulated everyone at work. She confirmed that they had lots of “tiffs” as Engelbrecht did not accept her (Etson's) authority.

[56]    Etson said that Engelbrecht only submitted to Clegg's authority and that Mrs Clegg had finally sorted out the problems between herself and Engelbrecht. Etson stated that what upset her most was Englebrecht's lying, which caused staff problems.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 10

[57]    Etson said that it was a company rule for staff to "check" on each other when leaving the premises past the tills with anything (company products). She continued that staff left via the respondent's garage door and anyone could see if one left with "anything" ("of jy goed dra in jou hande" – if you were carrying anything in your hands). Etson said that Engelbrecht had stolen from the previous owner and also did so the second time with the current owner.

[58]    Under cross examination, Etson acknowledged that it was a company rule not to dishonestly take its products without paying for it. Etson said that they only heard afterwards that Engelbrecht was not previously dismissed for theft but and that her testimony about Engelbrecht's stealing was incorrect and not truthful and apologised for this.

[59]    When asked about her assertion that Engelbrecht was paid to testify, Etson said that Engelbrecht could have been paid to testify against her and Matou at the arbitration as Engelbrecht tells lies.

[60]    Etson said that she never had problems with Clegg as they had a very good working relationship and said Clegg was a very good man and had treated her and Matou very well. She continued that Clegg was more than an employer and they worked very closely with him. Etson said that she was shocked ("dronk geslaan") when this matter surfaced and Clegg took Engelbrecht's word instead of hers.

[61]    Etson said that Clegg had no reason to get rid of herself and Matou and would not have attempted this route via Engelbrecht. She confirmed that Clegg's testimony during the arbitration proceedings was truthful, but could not understand Pino's testimony as he had worked with them the longest. Etson continued that she was on Pino's team and that the questions put to Pino and his answers were unclear.

[62]    Etson said that she and Matou had a very good working relationship with Pino and there was no necessity or reason for both Clegg and Pino to lie during the arbitration proceedings. Etson confirmed meeting Du Toit for the first time during her disciplinary inquiry and acknowledged that Du Toit had no reason to lie during the arbitration proceedings.

[63]    Etson stated that the disciplinary minutes as reflected in the bundle were correctly and accurately drafted (by Du Toit) and that the questions put to her by Clegg during her disciplinary proceedings were correct. Etson said that the exception was that she did not say "yes" to Clegg's question of "The fact that I didn’t want to keep you in the management team, did that not play a role in you not telling me about your suspicion towards Susan (Engelbrecht)?"

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 11

[64]    As to the question from Clegg about "Did you ever steal anything in this business" Etson said that her answer was not as minuted "Not while you are the owner, but I did steal from the previous owner. That was to get them back, but when you (Clegg) came it was different."

[65]    Etson said that Du Toit did not lie in this minuted section, but it was not her words and then said he could have lied in this minuted section.

[66]    Etson stated that when Pino said that she (Etson) admitted stealing from the previous owner he lied and could not explain why Pino and Du Toit would lie about this. She acknowledged that Pino, who was called by Barties as their witness during the arbitration proceedings, testified that she stole from the previous owner. Etson further acknowledged taking and failing the polygraph test and believed the only reason probably for failing this was that it was her first experience (of it). Etson continued that she had not known what to expect and that the Polygrapher was hard on her, she was put under pressure and was nervous.

[67]    Etson confirmed that the Polygrapher did explain the test and did a pre test, however she absorbed very little of it. She said that Hewitt lied on his version of the test process during his testimony, yet continued that she was not saying that Hewitt told lies during his testimony.

[68]    Etson said that as she is telling the truth, Hewitt had lied and said that she was getting confused with some of the questions put to her. However, when put to Etson that Engelbrecht's versions during her (Etson's) disciplinary inquiry and the arbitration were exactly the same and that Engelbrecht did not get confused, Etson responded that she was not getting confused, but it was the way she is being questioned.

[69]    Etson said Pino, Du Toit, Hewitt and Clegg had no reason to lie during their testimony and that they had not done so, but said that not all of Pino's testimony was truthful.

[70]    She acknowledged that her statement that the above named did not lie was not true. Etson further confirmed that company property included bulbs and plants and that some of the staff had made mention of Engelbrecht stealing. She continued that one staff member, called "Columbus" said he suspected Engelbrecht is busy with "untoward things" ("met verkeerde dinge besig"), but had not specified what and said he was watching Engelbrecht and she (Etson) had not bothered any further.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 12

[71]    Etson said that she was aware of GP's R100 000 stock losses as per Clegg, but she had not believed it appropriate to report this information received on Engelbrecht to Clegg. However, she had reported this to management, firstly Pino and secondly to Carol as she dealt with GP's figures. Etson then stated that she did not report Engelbrecht's alleged suspicious activities to Pino, but to Carol. She further admitted that she had not discussed reporting Englebrecht's activities to Barties, which was a very important issue. Etson said that she thinks she forgot to mention to Clegg when asked so during her disciplinary inquiry that she had reported Engelbrecht's activities to Carol.

[72]    Under re examination, Etson said she had no knowledge of polygraph testing and can thus not provide and opinion on this discipline. She further indicated that she did not really know the role of the Chairperson at her disciplinary hearing as disciplinary proceedings were unknown to her.

[73]    Etson said that she was not happy with her cross examination (arbitration), as it was not simplistic and had not understood some of the questions as it was complicated and reversed. She further could not understand Pino's testimony, although she understood English very well, but not 100% and is used to working with English customers.

[74]    Etson confirmed that the disciplinary charges did not specify the removal of bulbs and plants and just stated company property without identifying dates. She further stated that they did not know why they were suspended but had heard it was for stealing. Etson also stated that she did not know why they were dismissed as they were not given verbal reasons.

[75]    Applicant's closing argument was submitted in writing and was accordingly considered.

Analysis of evidence and argument

[76]    Although I have taken into account all the evidence before me, I am only taking into consideration that evidence which is relevant to determine the matter.

[77]    In order to make a finding one needs to consider which party's version is more probable, as well as taking into account that the respondent party bears the onus of proving that the dismissal was procedurally and substantively fair.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 13

[78]    It is important to note that both the respective representatives of the parties, Raubenheimer and Barties, requested and agreed that Etson will testify collectively for herself and Matou. Once during the proceedings Matou requested that she wanted to make input, which was granted.

[79]    Barties had it noted that he placed the respondent's bundle in dispute and objected to Raubenheimer's cross examination techniques with Etson as it was not specific, confused her and made her incompetent (incapable of answering the questions).

[80]    Although Barties disputed the respondent's bundle, the only areas raised during the proceedings related to the minutes, which will be dealt with below.

[81]    Etson did not directly query Raubenheimer's cross examination during her cross examination and re examination, other than when prompted by Barties. Further, Etson did not specify which part of or why Raubenheimer's cross examination was problematic. I have not reached the same view as asserted by Barties and Etson, during the proceedings and having reviewed the recorded proceedings. I have drawn the conclusion that Barties in re examination attempted to repair or defend the statements made by Etson during cross examination. Such evidence stands as elicited from Etson during cross examination.

[82]    Whilst the dismissal procedure was challenged by the applicant party, much time was spent on a) the vagueness of the applicants' suspension notices. The suspension notice stated “you are hereby suspended with immediate effect from your employ pending a disciplinary investigation to be conducted by the Company …”, dated 18 August 2008.

[83]    Etson (means both Etson and Matou) acknowledged being aware of GP's financial losses of R100 000. Even though it was not specifically stated in the suspension notice Etson indicated during testimony that they heard it was for stealing. Further, the applicants were also provided with their notices of inquiry on the 18 August 2008, which cited "Gross dishonest conduct in that you remove company property without permission from management". It would thus stand to reason that although not specifically cited on the suspension notice, which would be preferential, it is and would have been reasonable to conclude by the applicants that the suspension related to the removal of company property without permission.

[84]    Based on the above and the fact that GP had been informed that Etson and Matou, as well as two other staff members were allegedly involved in stealing, through information received from the  
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 14
dismissed employee, Engelbrecht, GP had genuine reason to suspend Etson and Matou as a holding operation pending disciplinary action. It is not uncommon for employers to suspend employees from duty, who are allegedly suspected of some form of gross misconduct while the matter is being investigated. Finally at no stage did the applicants challenge the suspension on receipt or during the course of the disciplinary proceedings, or for that matter as an unfair labour practice dispute.

[85]    It appears that the suspension form is a standard document in the respondent's disciplinary code and it may be well advised to create a space to insert the form of misconduct to be investigated. Further, although not raised in dispute, the employer if suspending an employee, should rather conclude its investigation and then issue a disciplinary notice, which normally would not be on the same day of the issuing of the suspension notice.

[86]    The next issue of dispute was b) the vagueness of the applicants' notices to attend a disciplinary inquiry. Such notice, dated 18 August 2008 read "Gross dishonest conduct in that you remove company property without permission from management". The applicant party argued that such notice was not specific and understandable.

[87]    Etson testified that she was fluent in English and dealt with English customers. She further led no evidence that she or Matou queried or requested further explanation of the charges on issue of the notice or at the disciplinary proceedings. It cannot be unreasonable to assume that any employee would know the term removal of company property, which is defined as, but not limited to "the possessions of a particular owner".

[88]    Although, once again it is acknowledged that the notice does not specifically state what company property was removed or when it was removed, Etson did not dispute that which was stated in the disciplinary minute which reflected plants and bulbs. The specifics thus became clear during the inquiry proceedings. Further, Etson acknowledged in testimony that bulbs and plants are company property. Finally, although the minutes were originally in dispute as argued by Barties, Etson during evidence acknowledged the minutes were a correct reflection of the proceedings, with the exception of her stating the she stole from her previous employer, before transfer to the Clegg's ownership. Such minutes reflect that the applicants confirmed their understanding of the charges and were ready to proceed.

[89]    I am not convinced that the allegation against the applicants was not understandable and that any reasonable person would know the meaning of the removal of company property without permission  
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 15
from management. Company property of whatever nature is indeed its property and only becomes that of someone else when purchased or given (with authority).

[90]    The respondent , acknowledged that they could not give specific objects taken on specific days as the “whistle blower” Engelbrecht had indicated that she together with 4 others, including Matou and Etson, had collectively stolen over an extended period of time, which made identifying specific objects difficult. This does not negate the respondent's ability to react to such serious allegations of misconduct and based on the evidence heard would then justify the respondent's right to dismiss if found guilty on the balance of probability.

[91]    I am of the view that the charges were specified in sufficient detail to allow the applicants to answer to it and as such the applicants were able to prepare a defence.

[92]    Barties and Etson argued that the Disciplinary Chair did not verbally explain why they were dismissed. However, this was refuted by Du Toit (the disciplinary chair) who stated that the applicants had been told verbally of the reasons for their dismissal, based on evidence of the applicants' involvement and on the balance of probability. This was also corroborated by Clegg, who was present at this stage of the disciplinary proceedings.

[93]    As already indicated Etson testified that Du Toit's disciplinary minutes were generally accurate, but then counters this by saying that dismissal reasons were not explained as reflected. Then under re examination Etson states that they did not know why they were suspended but had heard it was for stealing and then repeatedly acknowledges that Du Toit had no reason to lie in his testimony.

[94]    In Schedule 8 – The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal does not require reasons to be given for a valid decision made, although if it is done the decision gains greater credibility and acceptability as indicated in Grogan's Workplace Law, 8ed , page 200. In fact the Code says the employer should communicate the decision taken, and preferably, not must, furnish the employee with written notification of that decision.

[95]    Even though not an essential element to ensure a fair procedure, I am of the view that there is no reason to not believe that Du Toit verbally gave the applicants reasons for him to conclude that they were guilty of the allegations.

[96]    I am persuaded that the dismissal of the applicants was procedurally fair.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 16

[97]    As indicated in point 75, one has to consider the credibility of witnesses' versions in establishing whether on balance the dismissals were substantively fair.

[98]    Clegg, according to the applicants was a very good person and whom they had enjoyed a close working relationship and had treated them very well, testified directly and in a straight forward, plausible manner to that which was asked. In fact Etson confirmed that Clegg's testimony during the arbitration proceedings was truthful.

[99]    Clegg's reference to conveying financial/stock losses amounting to R100000, 00 to the applicants was acknowledged, even though it was denied in opening by Barties. His offer to provide corroborative documentary evidence of the stock losses was never pursued. Nor was Clegg's further reference of stock losses, post the dismissals of the 5 employees, including the applicants, being at a minimal to zero level challenged.

[100]    Hewitt, the Polygrapher, explained the polygraph testing procedures and processes and its significant reliability from which he concluded that Etson was deceptive in her answers. He confirmed that as Matou was pregnant at the time he was unable to perform the test, in line with international standards. Raubenheimer repeatedly had it noted that Etson's failing of the polygraph test was merely corroborative evidence.

[101]    Etson was of the view that Hewitt had no reason to lie about his testimony, but that he had done so in regard to the testing process. Yet Etson confirms during testimony that the Polygrapher did explain the test and did a pre test, however she had not absorbed much of this.

[102]    Du Toit , although during Etson's testimony is challenged for not correctly stating her words used when asked about whether she stole from her previous employer before the Clegg takeover, such challenge is never made or asked when the opportunity was presented in cross examination. Further challenge is made on Du Toit not giving verbal reasons for her and Matou's dismissal, which has already been dealt with and then such allegations are contradicted by Etson when she states the Du Toit had no reason to lie and did not do so and at the outset said that the minutes were accurately drafted by Du Toit.

[103]    More importantly in considering Engelbrecht's testimony during the proceedings is that she presented herself confidently. She was clear and direct in response to questions asked and did not appear affected during her thorough and somewhat robust cross examination by Barties. The  
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 17
evidence presented by Engelbrecht was confirmed to be directly in accord with that which she presented at the disciplinary hearings of the applicants.

[104]    Etson's allegation that Engelbrecht could have been paid to testify against herself and Matou, flies in the face of Etson and Matou's alleged high regard they hold for Clegg. It further contradicts their statement that Clegg was truthful in his evidence. Etson, other than an often used need for defense, makes this allegation without factual basis.

[105]    Engelbrecht willingly admitted having had arguments with Etson, which seem to be a “work practice” until Mrs Clegg resolved this, which is before the applicants' misconduct issues surfaced. Although Du Toit conceded that Engelbrecht who had stolen, could probably lie too, he had found, based on the holistic evidence and on balance, that the applicants were guilty. Etson was not able to corroborate her claim that Engelbrecht was an outright liar of note and in fact little was raised in cross examination to this effect.

[106]    Pino, the witness called for the applicants, testified that Etson and Matou's dismissals were not related to Engelbrecht's stealing on 10 August 2008, but misconduct of a similar nature over a period of time. This contradicts one of the main contentions from the applicant party that Etson and Matou's dismissals relate to the incident on 10 August 2008. Pino further stated that during Etson's inquiry she admitted stealing from the previous owner of the business, which corroborates what is reflected in Etson's disciplinary minute by Du Toit and Clegg's testimony.

[107]    Etson in comparison to the respondent's witnesses and their own witness, Pino was an abysmal witness. She was materially contradictory, inconsistent and could not comprehensively explain or answer uncomplicated questions.

[108]    Etson could not explain why she did not mention the report she received from a staff member of Engelbrecht's dubious activities to Clegg during the disciplinary hearing or prior, even though she was aware of stock losses and its importance. She exacerbates this by saying that she thinks she forgot to mention it. Further, she contradicts herself by initially saying that she reported this to Pino, who she had a very good working relationship with, and then to Carol (who deals with figures), but then states she only reported it to Carol. There is further contradictory testimony in relation to Etson's confirmation of the minutes, which state that she understood the disciplinary charges, but she then asserts during these proceedings that she did not understand the charges.

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 18

[109]    Etson's repeated testimony that Du Toit, Hewitt and Clegg had no reason to lie during their testimony and had not done so, yet she extracts points (including but not limited to) that Du Toit had verbally not explained the reason for finding them guilty. Etson goes as far as stating, the minuted answer to Clegg's question; "Did you steal anything in the business?" is answered "Not while you are the owner, but I did steal from the previous owner. That was to get them back, but when you came it was different" was a truthful reflection in the minute, however it was not her words. It may not be her direct words, however it is a powerful admission of guilt of earlier theft from what appears to be motivated from ill intent.

[110]    Etson further indicates that her own witness Pino, is being truthful, except when Pino stated that she (Etson) admitted stealing from the previous owner that he lied, yet could not explain why Pino and Du Toit would lie about this. These are further examples of contradictory and inconsistent evidence.

[111]    Barties arguments in defense of the applicants were unconvincing, particularly when Etson testified and was cross examined. Etson did not on behalf of Matou and herself present herself in a credible manner, as she was contradictory and inconsistent or unable to explain a number of pertinent and clear questions asked.

[112]    In consideration of the credibility of the witness testimony for the respondent, I am persuaded on balance that the applicants are guilty of gross misconduct relating to the removal of company property without authorization over a period of time.

[113]    In terms of Schedule 8, (7) the applicants were aware of the rule, which is valid and reasonable and which was consistently applied to all those party to the allegations.

[114]    One needs to be reminded that labour legislation only requires that the respondent proves that a dismissal was fair on balance of probability and not beyond reasonable doubt.

[115]    In Anglo American Farms Boschendal Restaurant v Komjwayo 1992 13 ILJ 573 (LAC), the true test was whether the employees action "had the effect of rendering the relationship of employer and employee intolerable". It is a clearly established principle "that dishonesty undermined the trust relationship upon which the employment relationship was built and so justified dismissal."

 
[2009] JOL 23031 (CCMA) at 19

[116]    GP has clearly indicated that the trust relationship has been severed based on the misconduct committed. This was even corroborated by the applicant Matou in her disciplinary minute, who understood why Clegg could no longer trust her. I am thus persuaded that dismissal is the appropriate sanction in this instance.

[117]    I am thus further persuaded, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent has discharged the onus of establishing the applicants' guilt in gross misconduct.

[118]    The respondent party requested that the commissioner consider a cost order against the applicant party.

[119]    Costs is a matter of discretion which should be approached in a fair manner (see Kruger Bros and Wasserman v Ruskin 1918 AD 63 at 69). The CCMA exclusively deals with social legislation and parties should not be discouraged from enforcing or defending their rights under such legislation by the possibility of facing cost orders should they lose (see Chevron Engineering (Pty) Ltd v Nkambule 2004 (3) SA 495 (SCA) at 512 para 42; Skhosana and others v Roos 2000 (4) SA 561 (LCC) page 574 para 30). Taking into account the facts of this case, I do not believe that it would be just and equitable to make a cost order against the applicant.

[120]    Further, it was alleged that Barties requested the expert witness to be called, namely Hewitt. However the record does not reflect that any formal request by Barties was made to this effect during the arbitration proceedings itself. On the contrary, when alleged, Barties refuted this and said that he had formally requested Pino as their witness and not Hewitt. It would thus be inappropriate to grant the respondent's request that the applicant party pay the costs for this witness.

Award

[121]    I uphold the dismissal of the applicants.

[122]    The case is dismissed.

[123]    The cost order is not granted.

Appearance:
Mr R Barties (Official of SDTU) (At); Mr S Raubenheimer (Official of ESOSA) (R)


End of Document