



NUMSA obo Kgatla / ABB SA (Pty) Ltd [2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Metal and Engineering Industries Bargaining Council
Case No: MEGA28066
Date: 07/12/2010
Before: K Driscoll, Commissioner
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Misconduct — Bringing employer’s name into disrepute — Employee falsely accusing employer of imposing job reservation and failing to comply with Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The employee, a project engineer, was dismissed after sending an e-mail to his black colleagues, some of the respondent’s clients, COSATU and the ANC Youth League alleging that the respondent was applying “job reservation”, that there were no opportunities for black employees, that the respondent was failing to implement affirmative action and that it dismissed employees who sought to persuade it to do so. The employee also claimed that white colleagues were favoured, and that he had had to “chase” management for salary increases. The respondent claimed that the employee’s accusations were false and had brought its name into disrepute.

The commissioner noted that the employee’s salary had almost tripled since his appointment to the respondent’s staff. The employee’s own progress gave the lie to the claim that there were no opportunities for black employees. The number of blacks in management positions had increased dramatically. Although the Department of Labour had ruled some years before that the respondent was not complying with the requirements of the EEA, it had since rectified the position and set up an equity committee. The employee could not have been ignorant of these developments. 

The commissioner noted further that the EEA made specific provision for complaints about the progress of employment equity. These provisions did not permit filing complaints with third parties like an employer’s clients, the ANC Youth League and COSATU. 

The commissioner found that the employee had made a number of false allegations about his employer. A charge of bringing an employer’s name into disrepute does not require proof of intention. 

Turning to the appropriateness of the sanction of dismissal, the commissioner noted that the employee’s contract expressly required the employee to “be loyal to the employer and promote the business and reputation of the employer”. The applicant had left the impression that he was aggrieved because he had not personally benefited from the respondent’s equity plan. The employee had blown up a personal issue into a company-wide issue, and had shown no remorse. Since the trust relationship had been irreparably harmed, the sanction of dismissal was appropriate.

The employee’s dismissal was upheld.

 
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 372

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

1.  Details of hearing and representation

The above arbitration was held on the 31 August and 25 November 2010 at the CDR offices, Johannesburg. Mr Nene, an attorney, represented the applicant on the 31 August 2010 and Ms Gqoka, an official of NUMSA (the union) represented the applicant on the 25 November 2010. Mr Zeeman, Human Resources Business Partner, appeared on behalf of the respondent. No interpreter was required. The proceedings were mechanically recorded and witnesses gave evidence under oath.

2.  The issue to be decided

Whether the dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair.

3.  Preliminary issues

The respondent submitted a bundle of documents to the arbitration and the applicant agreed that the documents are what they purport to be. On 25 November 2010, the respondent submitted additional documents and the applicant was given an opportunity to go through the documents with the assistance of his union representative. The union indicated that it did not have any questions of clarity regarding the documents. 

After narrowing the issues the parties agreed that the following are common cause: 

That the applicant was employed as a Project Engineer and earned a salary of R270 963 per annum. 
That the applicant had been employed as a Trainee in 2001 and was appointed to the position of Project Engineer in September 2007. 
That there are no procedural issues in dispute. 
That the applicant was found not guilty of Charge 2. 
That the applicant sent the emails in question and that the emails were sent to fellow employees and third parties. 
That the emails dated the 22 September 2009 and the 5 October 2009 were only sent to Black African employees. 
That the applicant sent an email to the ANC Youth League and to COSATU. 

The parties agreed that the following remain in dispute: 

Whether the allegations contained in the emails are false. 
Whether the contents of the emails brought the respondent’s name into disrepute. 
Whether the respondent was not in compliance with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 (“Employment Equity Act”). 
Whether the applicant’s allegations regarding job reservation and unfair dismissals of employees are true.  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 373

4.  Summary of evidence

Mr Zeeman, Human Resources Business Partner, testified that the matter was about false allegations made by the applicant to specific employees and to third parties. Mr Zeeman referred to the email dated the 22 September 2009 (see page 6 respondent bundle A) where the applicant stated that opportunities for growth do not exist at the respondent. Mr Zeeman testified that after the applicant was employed at the respondent he had been promoted to assistant Sales Engineer and received a salary increase (see page 44 of respondent bundle A), the applicant had then been promoted to Project Manager Associate and received a 50% salary increase (see page 45 of respondent bundle A). The applicant was then promoted to Project Engineer (see page 46 of respondent bundle A) and was promoted to Project Engineer Grade C3 (see page 47 of respondent bundle A). Mr Zeeman testified further that the applicant had therefore been promoted four times since his appointment and had received a 243% salary increase since then. Mr Zeeman referred to bundles C and D and stated that these were examples of employees who are also executive committee members. Mr Zeeman stated further that Mr Twala (See bundle C) had been promoted to Senior Project Manager on the 1 January 2005 and promoted on the 1 June 2007 to Divisional Manager. Mr Zeeman testified that these examples totally destroyed the applicant’s allegation that there are no opportunities for growth and showed it to be false. Mr Zeeman stated that when a senior appointment was made this would be communicated internally to employees. Mr Zeeman stated further that the building was open plan office and the applicant could therefore not have been ignorant of appointments. Mr Zeeman denied that opportunities for previously disadvantaged persons were limited as there are several Black employees appointed at executive committee level. 

Mr Zeeman testified that the applicant alleged in the email that he had not seen any changes since he had sent an email to the Chief Executive Officer of the ABB Group in 2005. Mr Zeeman referred to the respondent’s Employment Equity report of 2005 and 2008 (see pages 23 and 24 of respondent bundle A) submitted to the Department of Labour which showed that there had been an increase in the number of previously disadvantaged persons appointed to management and professional positions. Mr Zeeman testified further that the percentage of top management had increased from 16.66% in 2005 to 46% in 2008 (see pages 25 and 26 of respondent bundle A). Mr Zeeman stated that it was not possible that these changes could not have been noticed by the applicant. Mr Zeeman stated further that after 2005 the matter had been left to die and the respondent had not been aware that the applicant had sent the emails in question until some of the employees had raised the matter with Human Resources as they had been unhappy about receiving the email. 

Mr Zeeman testified that with regard to the allegations of unfair dismissal, that the applicant had not been involved in any of the disciplinary hearings (see page 13 of respondent bundle A) and could therefore not say whether the dismissals of the employees cited was unfair. Mr Zeeman stated that the employees concerned could make use of the dispute resolution procedures at the MEIBC. Mr Zeeman stated further that the applicant could not prove that the dismissals were based on victimisation. Mr Zeeman testified that if the applicant alleged that there was job reservation then the applicant was required to prove  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 374
this allegation. Mr Zeeman referred to an article which defines job reservation (see respondent bundle E) in this regard. Mr Zeeman stated further that the Chairman of the disciplinary hearing had observed that the applicant could only make vague allegations in this regard and that the allegation was therefore false. 

Mr Zeeman testified that the emails sent by the applicant had only been sent to Black employees and not all previously disadvantaged persons in the company. Mr Zeeman testified further that the applicant had also not sent the email to all Black employees as he had not included Black employees who held senior positions at the respondent, which would have been in a position to assist in ensuring change. 

Mr Zeeman referred to a letter from the Department of Trade and Industry in response to the applicant in 2006 (see page 42 of respondent bundle A) which showed that the applicant had been aware of where to refer his allegations. Mr Zeeman testified that in the applicant’s email to the ANC Youth League (see page 20 of respondent bundle A) the applicant indicated that he had contacted Eskom, which is one of the respondent’s clients. Mr Zeeman agreed that to his knowledge Eskom had not withdrawn any of its work due to the applicant’s email but stated that even if there had not been an immediate impact on the respondent’s work, it was sufficient that there was potential damage to the respondent. Mr Zeeman testified further that the applicant’s conditions of employment provides in clause 1.3 that the applicant undertakes to “be loyal to the employer and promote the business and reputation of the employer.” (See page 50 of respondent bundle A), which the applicant had failed to do. Mr Zeeman stated that an allegation which is false is not protected by legislation. Mr Zeeman stated further that the letter from the Department of Labour in 2005 was too far in the past to reflect the status of the respondent in 2009. 

Mr Zeeman testified that between 2005 and 2009 there had been a change to the Human resources department and a Compliance Officer had been appointed. Mr Zeeman testified further that the applicant had not raised any of the issues with any of the Human resources Business Partners or the Compliance Officer or lodged a grievance as any reasonable person would have done (see page 54 of respondent bundle A). Mr Zeeman stated that the applicant’s intention had not been to establish a platform as a constructive measure but to undermine the respondent and create dissention as he had not raised the issues with Human resources or the compliance officer or included senior Black employees. Mr Zeeman agreed that he had received an email from the applicant requesting advice on how to place an advertisement on the notice board for a committee and he had replied that the applicant did not have permission to form a committee. Mr Zeeman denied that there was no forum where employees could raise issues and stated that monthly meetings were held with the union and employees could also approach Human Resources or the Compliance Officer. Mr Zeeman stated further that the respondent also had a fully functional Employment Equity committee and employees had been elected to this committee. Mr Zeeman however agreed that the previous Employment Equity committees had not been very effective. Mr Zeeman stated that the applicant had been requesting that a workplace forum be formed, which had very different legal implications. 

 
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 375

The applicant testified that he had started at the respondent in 2001 as a Trainee and had then been placed on the accelerated development program to fast track Black engineers. The applicant stated that they were meant to spend six months overseas as part of this program but it had been cancelled due to lack of funds. The applicant testified further that from 2002 to 2003 his contract had been renewed on a three monthly basis until he was appointed to a permanent position as Sales Engineer in 2003. The applicant stated that he had been placed in the next position when the sales department had been closed down and the same had occurred on his subsequent position. The applicant denied that the positions were senior positions and stated that they had all been ordinary positions. The applicant testified that when he had joined the respondent a white co-worker had been appointed to a permanent position within three months and yet he had been told to wait until a permanent position became available. The applicant testified further that his salary was lower than that of co-workers who had the same responsibilities. The applicant stated that he had had to chase his managers to obtain salary increases and that he had agreed with his manager that he would set milestones and if the applicant achieved the deliverables then he would be able to negotiate salary increases. 

The applicant testified that in 2004 he and Mr Khalo had agreed to form an Employment Equity committee and had met with the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) where they had raised issues which were still current today (see page 22 of applicant bundle B). The applicant testified further that the CEO had said that he did not have any plan to develop Black people and that anyone who was unhappy with that could leave. The applicant agreed that a new CEO had been appointed in 2007. The applicant stated that he had then invited the Department of Labour to conduct an investigation and as a result the Department of Labour had issued a letter of non-compliance in February 2005. The applicant stated that the respondent had not objected to this and nothing had happened thereafter. 

The applicant stated further that prior to the meeting with the CEO he had followed internal procedures by first approaching the Human Resources department. The applicant testified that he had then decided to write to the Group CEO in Zurich (see page 23 of applicant bundle B). The applicant stated that at this time he was been a victim of discrimination as he had been brought his telephone bill and was informed that it was too high and that he should pay in. The applicant agreed that all the employees had been informed that their telephone bills were too high. The applicant testified that he had received a response to his letter from the Executive Director South Africa indicating that there would be an action plan put in place and that there would be no further correspondence on this issue (see page 23 of respondent bundle A). The applicant testified further that between 2005 and 2009 he had sent emails to the Department of Labour asking what had been done since the Department had issued the letter of non-compliance. The applicant agreed that he had not discussed the issues with management during this time and that he had not lodged a grievance. The applicant further agreed that the Department of Trade and Industry had informed him of where he could raise the issue. The applicant stated that he had gone to the CCMA and had been advised that as the matter was at the Department of Labour that he should allow the matter to run its course there. The applicant denied that the matter had been closed after 2005. The applicant stated that the outgoing Human Resource personnel should have handed over the information to the new Human Resources as an outstanding  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 376
matter but employees were left in the dark. The applicant agreed that he had not approached either the new Human Resources personnel or the Compliance Officer in 2009 to discuss his grievances. 

The applicant testified that when he had sent the emails he had not hidden his name and had indicated to employees that if anyone was uncomfortable that they could indicate that they did not want to receive the emails. The applicant stated that he had sent the email to employees that he had engaged with over the years on the issue of employment equity. The applicant testified that he had sent emails to third parties because the CEO had indicated that there was no plan to develop black employees. The applicant stated that he had sent an email to Whiphold because the respondent had a 20% share holding in this company, but had never received any response. The applicant stated further that he had then sent emails to Eskom and others. The applicant denied that his intention was malicious and stated that the emails did not contain information which was damaging to the respondent or that would bring the respondent’s name into disrepute. The applicant agreed that he had not included senior Black employees in his emails as he had not seen the need to bring in senior managers or directors as the idea had been to create a platform for people on the ground to raise issues. 

The applicant stated that he had discussed the formation of an Employment Equity committee with one of the Human Resources officers when he had been informed that an Employment Equity Committee was being formed and that the Human Resources had wanted to put the applicant’s name forward for election to the committee. 

The applicant testified that he had not been aware that he needed to obtain permission from the executive committee to form a committee and he had thus emailed the Human Resources Director to ask why they could not have a workplace forum but had been dismissed before he received a response. The applicant stated that the Employment Equity Act and the Labour Relations Act [66 of 1995 – Ed] allows for these issues to be raised with third parties and the respondent’s code of conduct did not preclude him from raising issues of transformation. The applicant stated further that although the respondent had included its Employment Equity figures in the documents these had not been authenticated and as there was no Employment Equity Plan there was no means of determining what the respondent had achieved. When it was put to the applicant that out of eight Divisional Managers only two were white employees the applicant stated that he had not been presented with an organogram. 

Mr Khalo testified that he had been employed by the respondent in 1989 as a Planning Clerk and had resigned in 2006. Mr Khalo testified further that he had been appointed as a Design Clerk in 1991 and then as a Store Supervisor in 1995. Mr Khalo stated that he had completed his BCom degree in 1999 and had been appointed to the respondent’s training program in 2001. Mr Khalo stated further that the training program had been scheduled to run for a year but had been stopped after four months for no apparent reason. Mr Khalo testified that in 2003 he had been idle until he had been placed at a site doing reconciliations and petty cash. Mr Khalo stated that he had not been appointed to a management position. 

Mr Khalo testified that he had been present at the meeting held with the CEO in 2004 and that the Human Resources Director had also been present. Mr Khalo  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 377
testified further that the CEO had made it clear that even if an employee had a Master’s degree that this would not guarantee that employee a management position and that employees should work themselves up into these positions. Mr Khalo stated that the CEO had also said that if they did not like this they could “go to hell” but had realised what he had said and then stated that he would see what he could do on the issues raised. 

The respondent submitted that it had only been required to prove that the allegations made by the applicant were false and that the applicant had brought the respondent’s name into disrepute in 2009. The respondent submitted further that it had shown that the applicant had himself been promoted four times and had been given increases to his salary which were extreme. The respondent contended that the Employment Equity reports and the certificate confirming the respondent’s rating confirmed that the respondent had complied with the requirements of the Employment Equity Act. The respondent contended that its top structure was very well represented in terms of employment equity and that the applicant had acted without mandate. The respondent argued further that the applicant had been informed by the Department of Trade and Industry where he should refer a dispute but had not done so. The respondent argued that the applicant had also not used the respondent’s internal procedures to lodge a grievance or approach Human Resources or the Compliance Officer but had raised the matter with third parties. The respondent contended that this showed that the applicant had acted in bad faith and with malicious intention. 

The respondent referred to the awards in its bundle of documents which confirmed that the spreading of lies was fair ground for dismissal. The respondent submitted further that the applicant had received the code of conduct which required that the applicant would at all times advance the interests of the respondent. The respondent contended that the applicant had not shown that employees were victimised for raising equity issues or that there was any form of job reservation. The respondent submitted that dismissal was the appropriate sanction. 

The union submitted that the respondent had failed to prove that the matter had died in 2005 and that it was a new issue in 2009. The union submitted further that the reason the applicant had not raised the issue during this time was because the CEO had indicated that the matter could not be raised again. The union contended that even if a new CEO had been appointed in 2007 and a new Human Resources department had been created that the respondent had not shown that the employees were aware that things would now be done differently. The union argued further that human resources was supposed to be the mediator between the employer and the employees and should have informed and assisted the applicant with regard to legislation and procedure but had failed to do so. 

The union submitted that it was not disputed that the applicant had been trained by the respondent but contended that the applicant had merely been moved around and not developed by the respondent. The union submitted further that Mr Khalo had testified that had still been a clerk when he left the respondent in 2006 even though he had a BCom degree. The union submitted that as the applicant had felt that the respondent had not changed its stance he had contacted those who he thought could help and had not gone to the press. 

 
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 378

The union contended that the respondent had not shown that it had suffered harm as a result of the applicant’s email. The union argued further that it was Human Resources which had failed the employees as it had not been helpful in terms of advancement and transformation. The union requested that the applicant be retrospectively reinstated. 

5.  Analysis of evidence and argument

The applicant was charged with: 

“Making false allegations about the company and/or bringing the name of the company into disrepute with fellow employees and/or third parties as you, by way of various email communications, including on 3 September 2009 and 28 September 2009 informed fellow employees and/or third parties that the company was discriminatory, in breach of labour legislation and/or stood in the way of advancing its black employees and/or you implied that this was the case. 

The company will contend in this regard that if there was any basis for you to make such allegations it would have been appropriate for you to have raised the issues internally either by way of grievance or with the company Compliance Officer, which you did not do.”


It is common cause that the applicant sent the emails in question to fellow employees and to third parties. The respondent focused on the applicant’s allegations that the respondent did not provide opportunities for growth and development, that the respondent had not complied with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act, that the respondent sanctioned job reservation and that employees who raised these issues were unfairly dismissed. I will deal with the issues of job reservation and unfair dismissal first. 

It was Mr Zeeman’s unchallenged evidence that the applicant had not cited any example of job reservation at his disciplinary hearing and that the respondent denied the existence of job reservation within the company. Mr Zeeman further testified that as the applicant had not been party to the disciplinary hearings of the two employees cited in his email of the 5 October 2009 (see page 13 respondent bundle A) the applicant could not make the allegation that the dismissals were due to the employees having raised issues of victimisation and discrimination. Indeed, the applicant did not address these issues in the arbitration and I therefore accept that the applicant has no proof that the employees were dismissed for the reasons he gave or that he is aware of any job reservation policy, agreement or example thereof. The applicant referred to two incidents in which he felt that he had been victimised. The first incident occurred in 2005 when he was presented with his telephone bill and informed that it was too high and that he should pay in an amount of money. That this occurred at the time when he was organising a committee to address equity issues is in my view no more than coincidental as the applicant confirmed that other employees had been given the same instruction. The respondent’s resources, including telephones, may be open to abuse and I am not convinced that the respondent was not entitled to curb telephone usage in order to save costs or that the respondent was precluded from requiring employees who had unusually high telephone bills to contribute to the payment of the bills. The second incident occurred in October 2009 when the applicant was issued with a warning for failing to comply with the respondent’s claim procedures. I have  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 379
read through the documents regarding the warning (see pages 31 to 35 of applicant bundle B) and am not persuaded that there was anything untoward in the approach taken by the applicant’s manager or that the warning was issued without any basis. As pointed out by the respondent, an employer is entitled to correct an employee’s conduct by means of disciplinary action. 

With regard to the applicant’s allegation that there are no opportunities for growth and development at the respondent, the applicant asserted that he had not been promoted and had merely been moved from position to position when restructuring occurred. The applicant further stated that he had been underpaid for the responsibilities which he carried and that his peers earned more than he did. In the absence of any evidence to this effect I am unable to assess the applicant’s assertion regarding pay parity. What is, however, in my view apparent is that the applicant was promoted and that his promotions and salary increases followed in quick succession. Indeed, it was not disputed that the applicant had received a 243% increase to his salary since his first permanent appointment in 2003. I find it difficult in light of this evidence to accept that the applicant was not being paid on the same level as his peers. The applicant’s evidence that his manager had established milestones for the applicant to achieve in order to justify an increase to the applicant’s salary is enlightening. If the applicant’s manager had to motivate any increases to the applicant’s salary this would imply that the applicant was already being paid at the appropriate level and not below that of his peers. The applicant is not an unskilled or semi skilled hourly paid employee whose rates are determined by the MEIBC but a professional employee whose salary will, and ought to be, determined by the market and the performance of the applicant. Achieving additional deliverables, I would agree, constitute a form of development. 

In light of the evidence relating to the applicant’s own career at the respondent, I am not persuaded that in the applicant’s case that there were no opportunities for growth and development. It was further put to the applicant that of the eight Divisional Managers at the respondent only two employees were white, which refuted the applicant’s allegations regarding the appointment of previously disadvantaged persons to senior management positions. The applicant’s response was that the respondent had not produced an organogram to support its contention. While I accept that no such document was adduced at the arbitration the applicant did not dispute the examples used by Mr Zeeman (see respondent bundle C) which show the promotion of previously disadvantaged persons into senior management positions from as early as 2005 nor did he challenge the names of senior management employees put to him. 

The respondent’s Employment Equity reports in addition confirm that at least 46% of top management at the respondent are made up of previously disadvantaged persons. The applicant’s contention that the reports had not been authenticated is, in light of other evidence led at the arbitration, ludicrous. I have taken into consideration Mr Khalo’s evidence regarding his career development at the respondent but am not convinced that Mr Khalo was not provided with an opportunity to develop his skills. Indeed, Mr Khalo testified that he had been appointed to the respondent’s training program in 2001 after he had obtained his BCom degree, which I accept was an opportunity for Mr Khalo to grow and develop his skills with the intention of placing Mr Khalo in a management  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 380
position. That the accelerated development program had to be cancelled due to a lack of funding does not in my view imply that there were no opportunities for growth and development within the company. 

It was argued by the union that even if the applicant had been provided with opportunities for development, this was not the case for most of the black employees at the respondent. Whether this is true or not is not at issue here. I agree with the respondent’s contention that the applicant had alleged that opportunities for growth and promotion do not exist and not that the opportunities were limited (see page 6 of respondent bundle A). The evidence before me if that not only the applicant, but other employees too, were provided with opportunities for growth and development and thus the applicant’s contention is false. 

It is common cause that the Department of Labour conducted an investigation in 2005 and that the Department issued a letter of non-compliance with the Employment Equity Act in February 2005. It appears that the applicant contacted the Department of Trade and Industry in October 2006 complaining that the respondent had not complied with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act (see page 42 of respondent bundle A) and that the applicant was advised to approach the CCMA or the Labour Court. The applicant testified that he had gone to the CCMA but had been advised to await the outcome of the process at the Department of Labour. The respondent submitted copies of its Employment Equity reports for 2005 and 2008 as well as confirmation of receipt of the Employment Equity reports for 2004, 2005 and 2007 (see pages 23 to 29 of respondent bundle A) and a copy of its Employment Equity Plan (see page 87 to 91 of respondent bundle A) as proof that it had complied with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act. I do, therefore, not agree with the applicant’s contention that the documents had not been authenticated and were merely print outs made by the respondent. Indeed, it is apparent that the applicant was aware that the respondent had established an Employment Equity committee in at least 2001 (see page 39 of applicant bundle B), even if the respondent had experienced some difficulties in making it fully functional. 

The applicant was furthermore aware prior to his dismissal that the respondent had been addressing this issue and that employees were to be elected to this committee. In light of this evidence, I am not persuaded that the respondent has not, since the Department of Labour issued its notice of non-compliance in 2005, failed to comply with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act. 

It is common cause that the applicant raised the issues of employment equity with the then CEO, Mr Pone, in 2004 and that he had then raised the same issues with the Group CEO in 2005 (See page 23 of applicant bundle B). It is incorrect that the applicant was informed that no further correspondence would be entered into on the issue. What the letter tells the applicant is that the Group CEO would not correspond with the applicant on this topic as the matter in one which should be dealt with in terms of South African law and resolved locally. The misconstruing of this letter was in my view opportunistic as the contents of this letter are clear. The applicant then appears after the interaction with the Department of Labour and the Department of Trade and Industry, to have let the matter, in terms of discussions with the respondent, lapse until 2009. 

 
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 381

Even if I accept that the applicant had understood that he could not raise the issue with the respondent, he was certainly aware that a new CEO had been appointed in 2007 with whom he could have raised the issue and as the Department of Labour appears not to have taken any action against the respondent, that he could have lodged a dispute at the CCMA. The applicant argued that he had followed the internal procedures in 2005 and was therefore not required to do so again in 2009. I do not agree for two reasons. Firstly, four years had elapsed since the applicant had raised the issue with the respondent and the applicant conceded that during this time he had not discussed the matter with the respondent. 

Secondly, I am not persuaded that the applicant would have been completely oblivious to the changes which had taken place in terms of appointments of previously disadvantaged persons to senior management positions or the appointment of a Compliance Officer or new Human Resources personnel. Surely it would have been reasonable to have expected the applicant to have at least requested copies of the Employment Equity reports or the respondent’s Employment Equity Plan or any other relevant information before he determined that nothing had in fact changed since his meeting with Mr Pone in 2004. I fail to see why the applicant felt it necessary to write to third parties before expressing his concerns internally. This is especially so as the applicant had not requested follow up information for four years and knew that an Employment Equity committee was being formed and that he had been nominated to be one of the employee representatives on this committee. 

The applicant contended that he was entitled to raise issues of transformation with third parties and that the Employment Equity Act allowed him to do so. Section 34 of the Employment Equity Act is very specific as to whom or which institution or organisation a complaint in terms of the Act may be made. Section 34 provides that 

“any employee or trade union representative may bring an alleged contravention of this Act to the attention of (a) another employee; (b) an employer; (c) a trade union; (d) a workplace forum; (e) a labour inspector; (f) the Director-General; or (g) the Commission.” 


The Commission in this instance meaning the Commission for Employment Equity, and Trade union meaning a trade union as defined in section 213 of the Labour Relations Act and registered in terms of section 96 and does not include a federation of trade unions. 

Section 10 of the Employment Equity Act further provides that if a dispute is declared that such dispute should be referred to the CCMA for conciliation and if the dispute remains unresolved the matter should be referred to the Labour Court for adjudication. Nowhere in the Employment Equity Act is provision made for complaints of non-compliance to be made to the ANC Youth League or COSATU or an employer’s clients. Indeed, complaints of the nature made by the applicant to third parties may in my view, only be condoned where the employee can show that he had attempted by all means to report the matter to the listed recipients without success and was left with no option but to approach third parties to solicit their assistance. 

Furthermore, the respondent’s statement of acknowledgement of the code of conduct, signed by the applicant, states that 

“I understand that I should report any possible violation of the Code of Conduct and raise any question or concern I have relating to compliance with 

 
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 382

the code through discussion with my management or with my company’s legal or human resource representative or through the ABB business ethics hotline.” 


(See page 54 of respondent bundle A). Although the applicant did not argue that his disclosures constituted protected disclosures in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act, the Labour Court observed in CWU & another v Mobile Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd (2003) 24 ILJ 1670 (LC) [also reported at [2003] 8 BLLR 741 (LC) – Ed] that: 

“The PDA seeks to balance an employee’s right to free speech with the interests of the employer. The requirement that a disclosure be made through an authorised channel is an integral element in structuring this balance. The PDA accordingly establishes as a condition for protection that a disclosure be made in accordance with a procedure that is either established or authorised.” 


The applicant had numerous options in this regard, both in terms of internal and external procedures. The applicant could have lodged a formal grievance, approached the Human Resources department or the Compliance Officer, raised the matter with his union to bring to the attention of the respondent or raised the issue at the Employment Equity Committee. The applicant failed to make use of any of these options. Alternatively, the applicant could have reported the alleged non-compliance to any of the persons, institutions or organisations cited in section 34 of the Employment Equity Act or lodged a dispute at the CCMA. Again the applicant ignored all of these options and instead contacted the ANC Youth League, COSATU and the respondent’s clients. Whilst I accept that it may be argued that COSATU could be considered to be a relevant organisation I am at a loss as to how the ANC Youth League has any relevance to the issue at hand.

With regard to the issue of whether the applicant did indeed bring the respondent’s name into disrepute and whether the respondent suffered any damage as a result of the emails, it is clear from the evidence before me that the applicant made a number of false allegations regarding the respondent not only to co-workers but also to third parties, including the respondent’s clients. In Timothy v Nampak Corrugated Containers (Pty) Ltd (Labour Appeal Court case number DA22/08 dated 17 March 2010, unreported (Jappie JA and Revelas AJA)) [reported at [2010] 8 BLLR 830 (LAC) – Ed], the Labour Appeal Court found that the Commissioner had been incorrect to assume that the offence of bringing the company’s name into disrepute required proof of intention. The Court held further that the only question was whether the name of the company had in fact been besmirched and that the evidence had shown that there was at the least a possibility that the company’s reputation could be harmed. It was conceded by the respondent that it had not immediately or subsequently lost any work assigned to it by Eskom due to the applicant’s email. I am nonetheless of the view that the reputation of a company cannot be solely measured in financial loss or damage as the public image of a company is a component of its ability to conduct business and secure future business which cannot be measure in monetary terms. I further agree with the respondent that it is sufficient that the applicant’s emails had the potential to cause the respondent financial damage. 

When considering the appropriateness of the sanction I have taken into consideration that not only does the common law require an employee to at all times further the interests of his employer but also that the applicant’s terms and  
[2011] 4 BALR 371 (MEIBC) at 383
conditions of employment required that he “be loyal to the employer and promote the business and reputation of the employer.” (Emphasis added. See page 50 of respondent bundle A, clause 1.3). I was further left with the impression that the applicant was unhappy that he had not, in his view, benefited from the respondent’s employment equity plan in terms of salary and position and thus harboured the opinion that the respondent had not transformed. Indeed, I agree with the Chairman of the disciplinary hearing comment that the applicant had generalised a personal issue to make it appear to be a company wide issue, when this was patently not the case. The applicant in addition failed to show any remorse for his actions, which is a key factor in determining appropriateness of sanction (See Timothy v Nampak Corrugated Containers (Pty) Ltd, supra). I furthermore concur with my learned Colleague in Sibanda / AMT Placement Services (Pty) Ltd [2007] 4 BALR 328 (MEIBC) that dismissal is appropriate where an employee has made a patently false claim. 

In the present matter, I am of the view that the trust relationship was irretrievably damaged by the applicant’s conduct and that dismissal is the appropriate sanction. 

6.  Award
The dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair. 
The dismissal is upheld. 
There is no order as to costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document