



Engelbrecht / SAPS & another [2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban 
Case No: PSSS 310 / 06 / 07 
Hearing Date(s): 08 / 08 / 2007 
Award Date(s): 14 / 08 / 2007 
Arbitrator: L Williams-De Beer 


Keywords


Labour law — Unfair labour practice — Failure to promote — Arbitration

Mini Summary


The applicant referred a dispute to the bargaining council, alleging that the respondent had committed an unfair labour practice in failing to promote him.

Held that the definition of an unfair labour practice includes any act or omission by the employer relating to promotion. The applicant bore the onus of proving that the employer's conduct was unfair.

In the present case, the evidence established that the employer had acted in terms of an employment equity plan. The person who was appointed to the post was qualified in terms of that plan. Although the applicant contended that he was the best candidate for the job, he adduced no evidence to support such contentions.

It was found that the respondent had not acted unfairly, and the application was dismissed.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 1

WILLIAMS-DE BEER

Details of hearing and representation

The con-arb took place at the SAPS offices at Servamus Building in Durban on 8 August 2007. The applicant was represented by Mr Khanyile from SAPU and the respondent was represented by Inspector Stander.

Issues to be decided

The applicant claimed that the respondent unfairly failed to promote him to post 3861.

The issue to be decided was thus whether the respondent's conduct in failing to promote the applicant was unfair and constituted an unfair labour practice.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 2

Preliminary issues

The respondent had no mandate to settle the matter and we proceeded directly to arbitration. An agreed bundle of documents was tendered into evidence.

Background to the dispute

The applicant applied for post 3861, level 8, in the Stock Theft Unit at Newcastle. He believed he was the most suitable candidate because he had 4 years' experience as commander of the unit and had all the relevant courses. He asked to be promoted to the rank of Captain with retrospective benefits to 29 July 2005. It was noted that he had subsequently been promoted to Captain in December 2005.

Survey of the evidence

Applicant

Hermanus Johannes Engelbrecht had been in the stock theft unit for ten years. In his first six years he was a docket investigator and for four years thereafter he was the commander of the unit. Fourteen members fell under his command. The applicant worked on several projects whilst at the unit, the biggest of which was the closure of the Utrecht unit and the incorporation of those members into his unit. In relation to his qualifications he had Matric and a National Diploma in Policing. The applicant had also undergone the detectives' courses, a stock theft investigators' course and an emerging leadership development programme.

At the time the post was advertised he had been doing the commander's job successfully for 4 years. He therefore met all the requirements for the post. The applicant believed he was the best candidate in that he had practical experience and theoretical knowledge.

Mchunu was awarded the post and the applicant knew him from the Glencoe Stock Theft Unit. He was just an investigating officer and had no command experience. He also hadn't finished the stock theft investigators' course which was a requirement for the post. The applicant conceded that was not mentioned in the advert but said it was obvious it was required because it taught one how to run a stock theft unit. He had more years in the unit than Mchunu and believed he was a better candidate. Kubheka was ranked as the second preferred candidate and the applicant knew him as well. Kubheka had been his second-in-command for two of the four years he was the commander. He didn't have a tertiary qualification.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 3

On cross-examination the applicant confirmed that Kubheka had a detectives' course, a stock theft course and an informer-handling course. He had also been at the unit since 1986 (page 65) which meant he had 19 years experience at the stock theft unit. Kubheka was rated a 3 on his PEP and scored 20. The applicant denied that Kubheka acted in the post and said he was only there during a transition period. Once the applicant returned to the unit, he took over the command. He disputed that Kubheka's lengthy experience in the unit made him a better candidate.

The applicant denied that he was only acting commander and said he became the commander after he had acted for 12 months. The post had been downgraded between 2002 and 2003 and from them on he was the commander. He admitted he hadn't mentioned the period he was acting in his application and had just called himself the commander but said the duties were in any event the same. The applicant was appointed by the Area Commissioner to act in 2002 when the encumbent was transferred. He acted for a year and, after that year expired, he was not told that his command had been cancelled, so he continued to operate as the commander. He "thought he was" the commander. It was true that his acting allowance was stopped. When he questioned it, he was told the post had been downgraded to that of inspector. The applicant denied that Inspector Niemand was the commander of the unit and said he only acted in his absence.

At the time the post was advertised the applicant wasn't acting in the post. It was true that a person who was acting had no right to be promoted but he believed that no longer applied to him because he had occupied the post for 3 years as the commander. The applicant submitted that he did have a right to be promoted.

Mchunu had a detectives' course and a B Tech and was scored higher than the applicant for "prior learning". He had been an investigator since 1989 and was also studying towards his M Tech. The applicant noted that the M Tech was in forensic investigation though, which was not relevant to stock theft. He submitted that in order to be the commander one had to know how the unit worked and one ought to have experience in managing a unit. The mere fact that Mchunu was a good investigator didn't mean he would be a good commander.

The applicant was aware of the requirements of Employment Equity and he understood that it had to be taken into account in the workplace. He had dealt with promotions and incentives as the commander of the unit so he had some knowledge of National Instruction 1 of 2004. When referred to the selection criteria in clause 12 he admitted equity was one of the criteria that the panel had to apply. He confirmed it was also required per Minute 8/1/1 Volume 35 (page 35). The applicant understood the importance of equity but pointed out that other white males were promoted in the same round. There was no proof of that in his bundle but he  
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 4
could get it. When referred to the EE plan for the province he agreed they had 260 white males at level 8 and only needed 101. He nonetheless insisted he was the best candidate.

Respondent

Bhekisisa Joseph Sibiya, a director at SAPS Madadeni, confirmed that he chaired the panel for this post at level 8. The panel was guided by the National Instruction and the 8/1/1 document relating to the posts advertised at that time.

Sibiya had previously been the Deputy Area Commissioner and he was thus aware of the command structure of the units in his area. During 2005 there was no commander at Stock Theft and the role was shared amongst the inspectors in the unit. He disputed the applicant's claim that he was the commander but agreed he had acted in that role from time to time. There was, however, a difference between an acting position and a commander position because when acting, one just "filled a gap". In any event, the panel treated all candidates equally and didn't give any advantage to a person who had acted.

The requirements for promotion to the post were found at page 19. In order to be promoted to level 8, one needed at least three years service on level 7; a rating of satisfactory on the PEP; a successfully completed determined course; NQF 6; and to be "suitable" for promotion. The panel applied the criteria set out in clause 12 of the National Instruction (page 26), namely: competence based on the inherent requirements of the job; prior learning and training; previous experience; employment equity; satisfactory performance record; suitability and record of conduct.

The applicant, Kubheka and Mchunu all met the requirements for promotion. They also met the criteria in clause 12 except that the applicant was not able to address equity. He was thus not the most preferred candidate. The panel had regard to the provincial equity plan at the time they selected the candidates and they used it primarily in determining the preferred candidates. It was used consistently. If one looked at the plan, it was clear that black males were under-represented. The target was 709 but they only had 490. White males, on the other hand, were over-represented by some 159. As the panel had African and White males on an equal footing, they elected to promote the African male. It was possible that other white males were appointed during the promotion process but Sibiya was not on that panel. He noted also that one couldn't apply equity blindly because it was not the only criterion. There could have been sound reasons to go against the equity plan in other appointments.

No applicant had a right to be promoted and the panel had to recommend who they thought was the best candidate for the post. They looked at all the applications and evaluated them in terms of Parts 1–3. The panel found that Mchunu had 15 years experience as an investigator and a B Tech degree. He was also  
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 5
studying towards an M Tech and they scored him highly on that aspect (page 55). The courses he did were relevant as well. Kubheka had done his basic training, as well as the detectives and stock theft courses. He also had more experience in the field than the applicant. The panel was firmly of the belief that Mchunu was the best candidate for the post.

On cross-examination Sibiya confirmed that the top three candidates had the same score. He explained that the panel gave 14 years experience and above 7 points. When ranking educational qualification they scored a Matric 6, a diploma 7 and a degree 8. That was how they came up with their marks for each candidate. It was true that they wrote "no" on page 50 for Mchunu's degree but once they looked carefully at his application it was clear he did have a degree (page 56). Part 2 was erroneous.

Sibiya agreed Mchunu hadn't done the stock theft course but denied it was the most relevant and said the panel viewed the detective course as equally relevant. The candidates didn't have to have every one of the determined courses and as long as they had one course, they were considered. The applicant scored 7 for prior learning and Mchunu scored 8 because he had a degree. They both scored 6 on their experience because they were viewed as equal in that regard.

The Area Commissioner appointed persons to act in a post and he decided the time frame. The job description for an acting commander and a commander were the same. Sibiya was not aware of any captain being in the post of commander after the encumbent left.

Summary of the argument

Mr Khanyile, for the applicant, argued that the applicant had 10 years experience in the stock theft unit and experience in management. He had a diploma and courses in which he had developed himself. In addition, he had been the commander in the unit. He was the most suitable candidate and the panel had not applied their mind in not promoting him. Mchunu hadn't done the stock theft course and had no managerial experience. The Director claimed they preferred Mchunu on equity but yet white males were promoted to level 8 in that round. The respondent was thus not consistent. Mr Khanyile asked that the applicant be promoted with back pay.

Mr Stander, for the respondent, argued that the panel was knowledgeable and had an understanding of the post. Their role was to select the most suitable candidate from the pool and they did so, based on a legitimate equity plan and the criteria in the National Instruction. If White and African candidates were equal, it was expected in terms of equity that the respondent would appoint the African person. That was done here and the applicant had put up no evidence to support his claims of inconsistency.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 6

Sibiya gave evidence that the panel assessed all three candidates fairly and he was a good witness. He testified that the procedure was fair and his evidence wasn't disputed. The panel did nothing wrong in preferring a designated candidate and the panel exercised their discretion in that regard fairly. Mchunu was suitably qualified for the post and in fact had more years experience than the applicant, and better qualifications than the applicant. Kubheka also had 9 more years experience than the applicant and he had also acted as a commander. There was thus nothing wrong with him being at number 2 on the list. Mr Stander asked that I dismiss the applicant's claim.

Analysis of the evidence

In terms of section 186 (2) "unfair labour practice" means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving:

unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
the failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000) on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."

The applicant's dispute was lodged in terms of section 186(2)(a) and it is trite law that a promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds – that the procedure was not followed properly, that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides (see in this regard Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 and Goliath v Medscheme (Pty) Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 760 (IC) [also reported at [1995] 9 BLLR 99 (IC)–Ed]).

The applicant did not challenge his non-promotion on grounds of discrimination and his dispute related primarily to substantive and, to a lesser extent, procedural fairness. The applicant bears the burden of proof in this regard and has to prove, for example, that he was overlooked for an unfair reason; that the respondent failed to adhere to its promotion procedures or policies; that the respondent relied on irrelevant criteria in making the appointment or that he was a better candidate than the person appointed. It is not, however, sufficient for the applicant only to prove the latter and he must also show that the respondent acted unfairly in so doing (Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA)).

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 7

I shall deal first with the procedural challenge and thereafter with the substantive challenge. In so doing, I must assess the competing versions of the parties as well as the documentary evidence before me.

The applicant was the sole witness for his case. He was a fairly reliable witness but certain aspects of his evidence were not substantiated, such as his claim [that] the post of commander was downgraded to inspector; his averment that he was appointed into the post; and his claim that the respondent acted inconsistently in the promotion process by appointing white males. His averments in that regard must thus be approached with caution.

The respondent's case was put forward by Director Bhekisisa Sibiya who was a reliable witness. He readily made concessions when required to do so (such as in relation to the error on Mchunu's Part 2) and there was no suggestion that he was dishonest in his evidence or had anything against the applicant. His evidence was concise and, for the most part, unchallenged. In the premises I have no reason not to accept his version.

With regard to the procedure adopted by the respondent, the applicant argued that the panel inconsistently applied the criteria listed in clause 12 of the National Instruction, most especially employment equity.

It was common cause that the policy document governing the posts for which the applicant applied was National Instruction 1 of 2004 entitled "Promotion of Employees of the Service to Post Levels 2 to 12". The relevant clauses under scrutiny were 9(2) and 12(1). For the record, I refer to the relevant extracts thereof below:

Generic functions of evaluation panels (whether interviews are conducted or not)
A panel must, in considering the applications for promotion, promote equal opportunities, fair treatment, employment equity and advance service delivery in the Service.

 . . .

12 Criteria for selection of candidates
The selection of a candidate must be based on the following criteria:
competence based on the inherent requirements of the job or the capacity to acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job;
prior learning, training and development;
record of previous experience;
employment equity in line with the Employment Equity plan of the relevant business unit;
evidence of satisfactory performance;
suitability; and
record of conduct."

The applicant did not dispute the existence or validity of the equity plan used by the panel, or the necessity for equity to be applied in promotions within the SAPS. He did, however, allege that the respondent had not applied the criterion consistently in that it had appointed other White males during the same round of promotions. There was no corroborating evidence to support his argument and in the premises I can find  
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 8
no foundation for the applicant's contention. It must also be noted that Sibiya testified that his panel did not apply the criterion inconsistently but that he could neither confirm nor deny what the other panels did. He also stated that there might be instances where equity could not be utilised, such as where the candidates were not of equal competence and his evidence in that regard was not refuted. I point out that, even had the applicant shown that some White males were appointed in that round, it would not in and of itself constitute proof that the respondent acted inconsistently and I would need him to submit some evidence to support his claims. As Sibiya stated, there might well have been justification for the appointments and only an examination of the merits of each case would enable me to draw the conclusion that the applicant seeks me to draw.

There were no other challenges to the procedure followed and I am accordingly satisfied that the procedure adopted by the respondent was fair. I therefore do not believe the applicant has discharged the onus of proving procedural unfairness.

The applicant also challenged substantive fairness and alleged he should have been appointed to the post. It was the applicant's contention that he met all the requirements for the post and was the most suited to the appointment because he had been acting as commander and had in fact been the commander of the unit for four years. No evidence was presented by the applicant to corroborate his contentions and I am thus unable to draw any firm conclusions as to his status at the unit.

He compared himself to Mchunu and averred that he had more command experience than Mchunu and more relevant courses. The applicant didn't dispute that Mchunu had 15 years' investigation experience but argued that he had no command experience and less experience in the Stock Theft Unit in specific. He conceded that Mchunu had a degree and was studying towards his M Tech but noted that he had not completed the stock theft investigators' course, a course the applicant claimed was a necessity for the post. The applicant agreed that Kubheka ranked ahead of him on the preferred list, also had lengthy service in the SAPS and particularly lengthy service in the Stock Theft Unit but submitted that he had no command experience. Kubheka had completed similar courses to him.

Sibiya gave evidence that the panel scored all of the candidates equally in terms of their years of experience. No candidates were given additional marks for acting and the applicant was thus not at an advantage as a result thereof. Sibiya disputed that the applicant was the commander of the unit and testified that the unit was without a commander from 2005 onwards. The role was shared amongst the members of the unit. He didn't dispute that the applicant had acted in the post but averred that it didn't entitle him to the promotion. This argument is supported by the National Instruction.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 9

With regard to the other candidates, Sibiya explained that the panel scored a degree 8, a diploma 7 and a Matric 6. This thus accounted for Mchunu's higher score of 8. In relation to the competence for the job, the panel recognised the applicant's superior experience and time in command and he thus scored 7 as opposed to Mchunu's 6. Kubheka was ranked equally because of his 19 years' experience in the Stock Theft Unit. On the record of experience, the applicant and Mchunu were ranked equally.

Sibiya agreed that the applicant was a suitable candidate but averred that others were simply more suitable because of the requirement of employment equity. It was expected of the respondent to promote candidates from designated groups where they were deemed "suitably qualified" for the job and that was what they had done.

John Grogan in the matter of Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA) stated that the relative strengths and weaknesses of the candidates could not in themselves prove that the employer committed an unfair labour practice. He noted that commissioners were not intended to take on the role of recruitment agencies and said it was not their function to assess which candidate was best, but rather to ensure that the employer acted fairly in making its selection. The inferiority of the successful candidate was, he found, only relevant if it indicated that a superior candidate was overlooked for some unacceptable reason. This was view was endorsed by the Labour Court in Ndlovu v CCMA & others (2000) 2 ILJ 1653 (LC) [also reported at [2000] JOL 6428 (LC)–Ed], wherein the court held that it was not sufficient for a complainant to say that he or she was qualified by experience, ability or formal education but rather that the employer's decision to appoint someone else was unfair.

In Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 the issue was whether the respondent's conduct in not promoting the applicant to the position of assistant director amounted to an unfair labour practice. The commissioner assessed the facts and stated that the decision to promote an employee falls within the prerogative of management. He disagreed with the decision of George v Liberty Life Association of Africa Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 571 (IC) but supported the finding in Goliath v Medscheme (supra) wherein the court said that, where discrimination is not alleged, the applicant had to show "gross unreasonableness such that would lead to an inference of mala fides" before he could succeed with an unfair labour practice claim.

In casu, it could not be disputed that all of the preferred candidates had the requisite qualifications and work experience, and that each one of them met the requirements for promotion. Sibiya's evidence that the panel looked at each candidate's entire career history was not disputed nor was his assertion that they did apply their minds to the applications before them. Admittedly there was an error on Mchunu's Part 2, but I do not believe that was material and Sibiya confirmed that by the time the preferred list was compiled, the panel were fully aware he had a degree.

 
[2007] JOL 20688 (SSSBC) at 10

The panel used a rational scoring process and Sibiya's explanation of how they scored the candidates was not challenged. I also accept the manner in which the panel applied equity as a criterion and it was not done to prefer a lower scoring candidate to a higher scoring candidate, but applied to members who scored equally. In addition a proper written equity plan was submitted and accepted, and I have no reason to dispute the figures contained therein. The need for the application of equity in this round of promotions and at this level was self-evident from the plan and I accordingly accept this was a valid basis to distinguish between three equally rated candidates.

There was nothing before me to suggest that the panel's reasoning was somehow deficient or that it was grossly unreasonable. The mere fact that the applicant acted, or was, the unit commander did not automatically entitle him to the post and he still bears the burden of proving the decision to appoint Mchunu ahead of him was incorrect and unjustifiable. I do not find that to be the case.

I am not willing, or entitled, to substitute my view for that of the panel where they are able to justify their decision and I believe they have done so in casu. I thus cannot see any basis for overruling the respondent's decision and do not believe it committed an unfair labour practice by failing to promote the applicant.

Award

The application is dismissed.

Appearance:
Mr Khanyile, SAPU (At); Inspector Stander (R)


End of Document