



Gamede v Public Protector [2018] JOL 40338 (GP)
Judgments Online

Division: Gauteng, Pretoria
Case No: 99246 / 2015
Hearing Date(s): 25 / 04 / 2018
Judgment Date(s): 24 / 08 / 2018
Bench: De Vos J


Keywords


Constitutional and Administrative Law — Public Protector — Powers and duties — Investigation into organ of State — Refusal of request for documents

Mini Summary


The applicant was the Member of the Executive Council ("the MEC") for the Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Land and Environmental Affairs for Mpumalanga. The respondent (the Public Protector) received a complaint against the applicant in his official capacity, regarding certain allegations of maladministration, corruption and irregularities in the Department. 

In terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000, the applicant sought the review of the refusal by the respondent to furnish information and documents requested by the applicant during the preliminary investigation process. The application was also based on the principle of legality. 

The Public Protector opposed the application on the basis that no reviewable decision had been taken in the preliminary stage of the investigation. Therefore, the request for information and its subsequent refusal did not constitute administrative action for the purposes of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act and was not subject to review. 

Held that section 182(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 empowers the Pubic Protector to investigate any conduct in State affairs, or in the public administration in any sphere of government, that is alleged or suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety or prejudice to report on that conduct; and to take appropriate remedial action. 

Section 6(1) of the Public Protector Act 23 of 1994 specifies the way in which an investigation by the Public Protector may be initiated. The respondent's version was that, in the present case, she was in the process of gathering information. The gathering of information is part of the mandate under which the respondent operates and requires no decision. It is merely an interim phase where a function is performed as envisaged by section 239(b) of the Constitution. 

After considering relevant case authority, the court held that the Constitution and the Public Protector Act place a duty on the Public Protector to investigate, either on her own initiative or on receipt of a complaint or an allegation which points to conduct referred to in sections 6(4) or 6(5) of the Act. It includes the power to conduct a preliminary investigation for the purposes of determining the merits of the complaint or allegation and the manner in which the matter concerned should be dealt with. Section 7(1)(b)(i) gives the respondent a broad discretion in determining how to conduct the investigation. Section 7(9) of the Act holds that the respondent must provide any person who may be implicated by her findings with an opportunity to respond in connection therewith. The manner in which the opportunity to respond is given is left for determination by the respondent, in light of the circumstances of the case.

The applicant's primary argument rested on his interpretation of section 7(9)(a) of the Public Protector Act, which reads, “If it appears to the Public Protector during the course of an investigation that any person is being implicated in the matter being investigated and that such implication may be to the detriment of that person or that an adverse finding pertaining to that person may result, the Public Protector shall afford such person an opportunity to respond in connection therewith, in any manner that may be expedient under the circumstances.”

It was accepted that the investigation process was still in the preliminary stage and essentially comprised of an information-gathering exercise. There was no basis to conclude that, on the relevant date, sufficient facts were available to the respondent on which she could reasonably state that it appeared to her that the applicant might be implicated to his detriment. The determination not to provide the applicant with documents at that stage of the investigation was not unreasonable. 

The application was dismissed with costs. 

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 1

DE VOS J:

[1]    This is a review application in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000 ("PAJA"), resulting from a refusal by the respondent to furnish information and documents requested by the applicant during the preliminary investigation process. The applicant also seeks further and ancillary relief.

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 2

[2]    The applicant, Muzikayifani Andrias Gamede, is the Member of the Executive Council ("the MEC") for the Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Land and Environmental Affairs for the Mpumalanga Province. The respondent, the Public Protector, received a complaint against him in his official capacity, regarding certain allegations of maladministration, corruption and irregularities in the Department of which he is the MEC. The Public Protector undertook a preliminary investigation, in the course of which she informed the applicant about the allegations, and asked him to make certain information available to her.

[3]    The applicant brought this application as a result of the investigation. The relevant factual background will be dealt with later in this judgment. The applicant seeks a review of the Public Protector's refusal to provide certain information and documents requested by him. The application is brought in terms of PAJA and the principle of legality, on the basis that the Public Protector's refusal is an administrative decision and subject to review.

In addition to setting aside the purported administrative decision the applicant seeks an order substituting the Public Protector's refusal with an order directing her to produce the requested information and documents within 30 days of the date of the order.

[4]    The Public Protector opposes this application on the basis that no reviewable "decision" has been taken in the preliminary stage of the investigation. Therefore, the request for information and its subsequent refusal does not constitute administrative action for the purposes of PAJA and is not subject to review. Alternatively, and even if the refusal is reviewable, the respondent contends that the  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 3
applicant has not made out a case for a decision to be set aside. It is further contended that substitution is an extraordinary remedy to be used in exceptional circumstances and the applicant has laid no basis for this Court to grant such relief.

[5]    The prayers in this application are limited to the founding affidavit and the affidavits filed in opposition thereto. The applicant did not file any replying affidavit. The application is not based on any real dispute of facts. The issue before me is thus, strictly speaking, one of law. To the extent that any factual issue may arise, as with all motion proceedings, the Plascon-Evans rule applies (see Plascon-Evans Paints Ltd v Van Riebeeck Paints (Pty) Ltd 1984 (3) SA 623 (A) [also reported at [1984] 2 All SA 366 (A) – Ed]). Final relief may therefore only be granted if the facts as stated by the respondent, together with the admitted facts in the applicant's affidavit, justify the granting of such relief (see Nampesca (SA) Products (Pty) Ltd v Zaderer and others 1999 (1) SA 886 (C) at 892H–J [also reported at [1998] JOL 2757 (C) – Ed]; Townsend Productions (Pty) Ltd v Leech and others 2001 (4) SA 33 (C) at 40E–H [also reported at [2001] JOL 7867 (C) – Ed]).

Background to the application

[6]    In June 2015 an anonymous complaint was lodged with the Office of the Public Protector against the applicant in his capacity as a Member of the Executive Committee for the Department of Rural Development, Land and Environmental Affairs: Mpumalanga Provincial Government. The applicant was accused of maladministration, corruption, tender irregularities and infringement of the Department's procurement processes and procedures.

[7]    A lead investigator was assigned by the Public Protector to assist in the investigation of the complaints as envisioned by section 3 of the Public Protector Act 23 of 1994 ("the Act").

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 4

[8]    The respondent, upon receiving the complaint, instituted a preliminary investigation to determine the merit of the complaint and how best to conduct the investigation. This is the respondent's usual procedure. Only after the preliminary investigation is complete, and the complaint is found to be substantive, will a full-scale investigation be launched.

[9]    The investigator allocated to the matter undertook an information-gathering exercise, including the collation and procurement of information, and interaction with the complainant, the applicant and factual witnesses.

[10]    On 17 June 2015 the respondent wrote to the applicant as per annexure "AG2", wherein the applicant was informed that:

the respondent was investigating a complaint lodged against him in his official capacity in connection with allegations of maladministration, corruption, tender irregularities and infringement of procurement processes and procedures;
the investigations were being conducted in terms of section 182(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 ("the Constitution"), read with sections 6 and 7 of the Public Protector Act;
in essence, the allegations against the applicant are set out in paragraph 3 of "AG2" and are:
that he used his position as MEC to influence the awards of countless contracts and/or tenders to a company only known as Lwati, which was allegedly owned by an entrepreneur known as Nunu McDonald, in contravention of the Department's Supply Chain Management  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 5
processes and procedures; and that he had a romantic relationship with Ms McDonald, and has a child with her;
that he disregarded the departmental procurement processes and procedures and directed that contracts in the Department be awarded to his friends and associates;
that he unduly interfered with the appointment of personnel to serve in the bid committees and directed that his friends and associates be prioritised ostensibly to ensure that he is in control of those bid committees;
that he removed a competent, honest, and efficient chief financial officer, Mr Cyril Dlamini, and replaced him with a more compliant CFO, Ms FA Ngobeni; and also removed the head of the SCM unit, Mr Monareng, and replaced him with a more compliant head, Mr OB Magagula;
appointed his associate, Mr Henry Ndlovu, to head the Masibuyele eMasimini programme for his own benefit, and that during the Christmas period of 2014, Mr Ndlovu used State resources within the programme to plough and plant on applicant's farms;
that he bestowed upon a certain Mr Venti Mahlangu strategic powers and authority which in law, and according to his job description, he did not possess, and promising him an appointment as chief director and curtailed the powers and responsibilities of Mr IL Silinda, who was the chief director, and bestowed upon Mr Mahlangu the powers and authority with the view of furthering his alleged corrupt and improper practices within the Department; 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 6
 (vii) that he unduly interfered with the appointment of service providers and in particular TWK Agriculture Group and AFGRI Operations Company in respect of a contract for the supply, delivery, transportation and maintenance of the departmental tractors and implements as well as sought to irregularly extend the service level agreement entered into with these entities after it had expired;
that the said appointments referred to above are alleged to be in contravention of the Department's procurement processes and procedures and constitute improper deviations from normal procurement processes which was sought with the assistance of Mr Ndlovu and the director responsible for legal services, Mrs K Mdhluli, and further personally signed the awarding of tenders to these entities; 
that he is alleged to have received improper benefits from awarding contracts to TWK Agriculture Group and AFGRI Operations Company as the said companies bought tractors for him as a reward;
that he unduly interfered with the Livestock Improvement Programme and directed the award of a tender for the supply of Nguni cattle under Bid No. ALA/332/14/MP to Radley Landgoed (Pty) Ltd, contravening the Department's procurement processes and procedures; and that notwithstanding this matter having been brought to the attention of the Premier, the MEC, and the Head of Department, nothing had been done to date, despite the supplier having been paid without delivery of services, and that a certain Mr Ray Keeney was alleged to having committed an act of fronting for Radley Landgoed (Pty) Ltd ostensibly to defraud the Department; and 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 7
 (xi) that in all the meetings called at the behest of the MEC, the main items in agenda are tenders and that the applicant inappropriately attend to all the departmental meetings where tenders are going to be discussed with a pre-determined entity that must be awarded the tender. It is also alleged that the applicant received several improper benefits from successful bidders in exchange for awarding tenders and that is the reason why the applicant personally invite[d] successful bidders to his office to present them with letters of appointment.

[11]    The respondent's request to the applicant that he make certain information available to her in order for her to undertake a preliminary investigation is set out in paragraph 4 of "AG2" and reads as follows:

"To assist in the investigation of this complaint with a view to expediting same, you are kindly requested to provide me with the following information and copies of relevant supporting documentation."

Paragraphs 4.1–4.8 then deals with the relevant documentation required. In paragraph 4.9 a detailed statement is requested. It reads as follows:

"A detailed statement accompanying the requested information and documentation providing an explanation in response to the allegations whether the MEC improperly uses his position to influence the awarding of tenders to the entities referred to above as well as his associates; manipulates the composition of bid committees for his own improper benefit as alleged; unduly interferes with the appointment of personnel in the Department as well as undue interference in procurement matters which are supposed to resort under the administration of the Department; unduly influenced personnel to use state resources to plough and plant his farms as alleged."

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 8

[12]    In paragraph 6 the applicant is requested to refrain from being seen as interfering with matters of procurement in the Department in the light of the above allegations, ". . . at least until I have concluded the investigation and issued a report which I hope to release as soon as the investigation has been concluded".

[13]    A similar request for this information was made to the Head of Department in his capacity as the Accounting Officer in order to facilitate the collation of all the information pertaining to the complaints.

[14]    The applicant responded to the respondent's letter on 1 July 2015, providing some response to the allegations and furnishing certain documents.

[15]    On 24 July 2015, the respondent advised the applicant of the following:

the investigation was still in its preliminary stages, which involved gathering relevant information, and
if necessary, the applicant would be invited to appear before her at a future date to be arranged.

[16]    During September to October 2015, selected witnesses were interviewed by the respondent. In a letter dated 30 September 2015, while the process of information-gathering was still under way, the applicant's attorney addressed a letter to the Public Protector with the following request, as per annexure "AD4":

". . . he has instructed us to request from yourself the actual complaint with the names of the complainants defaced (if necessary), all documents that may have been furnished to yourself to substantiate the complaint so as to enable him to supplement his response if necessary."

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 9

[17]    In a letter dated 2 November 2015, the applicant again requested from the Public Protector the following:

". . . all documents that may have been furnished to yourself, an inventory of the said documents, as well as the recordings and/or transcripts thereof, so as to enable our client to reformulate and/or supplement a response to the various allegations of maladministration, corruption, tender irregularities, corruption and alleged infringement in the DARDLEA procurement process and procedure you are currently investigating."

[18]    In response to both the requests, the Public Protector informed the applicant, in a letter dated 13 November 2015 that:

she was unable to accede to the request whilst her investigation was underway;
she would, at the appropriate time, invite the applicant to an interview, at which interview he could be assisted by a legal representative of his choice; and
if it appeared to the Public Protector that the applicant could be in any way be [sic] implicated by the investigation and that such implication could be to his detriment, or an adverse finding could be made against him, he would be afforded a further opportunity to respond.

[19]    The applicant in turn responded with a letter on 19 November 2015, invoking section 32 of the Constitution (the right of access to information) and section 33 of the Constitution (the right to just administrative action). He claimed to be in possession of an anonymous open letter that had been circulating on social media the previous month in respect of the allegations arising from the complaint lodged with the respondent, and which he claimed "predetermined [his] fate". He wanted to  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 10
know whether a similar letter was in the respondent's possession. In her opposing affidavit the respondent denied that she was aware of such an allegation.

[20]    In a letter dated 24 November 2015 the respondent made it clear to the applicant that the role of the Public Protector was not to assist in uncovering anonymous accusers on social media. The letter stated:

"Once I have evidence implicating you and on the basis of such, I am considering making adverse findings against you, I am compelled by section 7(9) of the Public Protector Act to share such evidence with you and should that situation arise I will certainly do so."

[21]    Shortly thereafter, on 11 December 2015, the applicant launched the review proceedings.

Applicant's reasons for seeking a review

[22]    The departure point of the applicant's review application is that the applicant was considered to be implicated in what was considered to be wrongful and unlawful conduct. It is contended that the allegations contained in paragraph 3 of annexure "AG2" implicate the applicant in what is alleged to be maladministration, corruption, tender irregularities and infringement of procurement processes and procedures. It is contended that to suggest that the applicant could only become "implicated" at the end of the investigative process, at which stage section 7(9)(a) would come into effect thus entitling the applicant to respond further, would be to suggest that the applicant is not at all implicated prior thereto, which clearly is not the case, as can be seen in the response received from the respondent, which reflects that despite the applicant's request and the submissions contained in his letters, the investigation is continuing. Within this context, the applicant requested on  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 11
30 September 2015 that the respondent provide the actual complaint as well as all documents relating thereto, so that he could supplement his response if necessary. Due to the fact that there was no response from the respondent a further letter was despatched on 2 November 2015. On 13 November 2015 the respondent replied to both letters, declining to accede to the requests while the investigation was underway, stating that she would invite the applicant to an interview at the appropriate time and stating further, that if it appeared that the applicant could be implicated by the investigation and that such implication could be to his detriment, or an adverse finding could be made against him, he would be afforded a further opportunity to respond.

[23]    The subsequent letter by the applicant, dated 19 November 2015, was to seek clarification in respect of a publication on social media. In her response thereto, dated 24 November 2015, the respondent denied any knowledge of the publication on social media and confirmed that once she had evidence implicating him – and on the basis of such she was considering making adverse findings against him – she was compelled in terms of section 7(9) of the Public Protector Act to share such evidence with him. She indicated that if such a situation arose, she would certainly act in accordance with section 7(9). 

The Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000 (PAJA)

[24]    The applicant contends that the respondent performed an administrative act as defined in section 1 of PAJA:

"any decision taken, or any failure to take a decision, by:

an organ of state, when–
exercising a power in terms of the Constitution . . .; or 
exercising a public power or performing a public function in terms of any legislation; or 
. . .  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 12

which adversely affects the rights of any person and which has a direct, external legal effect . . ."

The applicant contends that the question to be determined is thus whether the decision (ie to institute an investigation and subsequently to refuse his request for information) "adversely affects the rights of any person", ie the applicant, and has a "direct, external legal effect".

[25]    It is contended that in terms of the Public Protector Act, an "investigation" means an "investigation referred to in section 7, including any preliminary investigation related thereto". 

[26]    The applicant's primary argument rests on a particular interpretation of section 7(9)(a) of the Act and in particular, the words "appears" and "may". Section 7(9)(a) reads as follows:

"(9)(a)  If it appears to the Public Protector during the course of an investigation that any person is being implicated in the matter being investigated and that such implication may be to the detriment of that person or that an adverse finding pertaining to that person may result, the Public Protector shall afford such person an opportunity to respond in connection therewith, in any manner that may be expedient under the circumstances."

The applicant's contention is that this section does not mean that there must be any concrete evidence that a person may be implicated in a matter being investigated, or concrete evidence that the implication of that person may be to that person's  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 13
detriment. Rather, the requirement is that it must "appear" to the respondent that a person "may" be implicated to his/her detriment. The requirement is therefore far less. In essence, even a remote possibility triggers the provisions of the subsection as the definition of "investigation" includes a preliminary investigation.

[27]    It is contended that the respondent's refusal of 13 November 2015 is a reviewable administrative action in terms of PAJA. Therefore the application is not ill-conceived, without basis or premature as submitted by the respondent. It is contended that section 7(9) need not be triggered before the applicant is entitled to exercise his rights to take the respondent's refusal (ie the administrative action) on review.

[28]    The applicant contends that, in fact, it did appear to the respondent that the applicant may be detrimentally implicated and that it ought to have appeared to the respondent that this was the case simply from the moment the complaint was received. Referring to Baxter Administrative Law at 582–583, it is argued that our courts do recognise the fact that some preliminary decisions may have serious consequences in themselves, depending on their context. Specific reference is made to page 585, where Baxter refers to the principle of "natural justice" and highlights that for the individual affected by the ultimate decision, the whole process is a unitary one. It is the applicant's contention that this is precisely what concerns the applicant and why the decision of 13 November 2015 has given rise to the present application. The applicant also relies on Grey's Marine Hout Bay (Pty) Ltd and others v Minister of Public Works and others 2005 (6) SA 313 (SCA) [also reported at [2005] JOL 14415 (SCA) – Ed], where it was held that the ambit is wide enough to cover a situation where same had the capacity to "adversely affect the rights of any person and a direct, external legal  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 14
effect". In Oosthuizen's Transport (Pty) Ltd and others v MEC, Road Traffic Matters, Mpumalanga and others 2008 (2) SA 570 (T) at paras [28]–[29] it was held that even a preliminary decision can fall within the ambit of such definition, where it will form a basis for a possible decision. The applicant submits, quoting Chairman, Board on Tariffs and Trade and others v Brenco Inc and others 2001 (4) SA 511 (SCA) at paragraph [30], that in carrying out its investigative functions BTT "must not act vexatiously or oppressively towards those persons subject to investigation". It is contended that refusing the applicant's request at the investigative juncture is oppressive. The applicant also referred to Director: Mineral Development, Gauteng Region and another v Save the Vaal Environment and others [1999] 2 All SA 381 (A) [also reported at [1999] JOL 4625 (A) – Ed] where the court recognised that there are preliminary decisions which warrant challenge.

Respondent's reasons for opposing the review application

[29]    The respondent contends that the meaning of section 7(9)(a) must be arrived at by looking at the section in context. This context includes the practicalities of the powers exercised and the functions carried out by the respondent, as well as the manner in which the Act anticipates the respondent will function. It is not disputed that the respondent receives and investigates thousands of complaints a year. For example, in the 2014 financial year almost 40 000 complaints were investigated, of which over 26 000 were received during that financial year. In this context, the respondent must put in place some kind of sifting process in order to determine which complaints have substance and are worthy of investigation. It is during this stage of the investigation that the present review application was brought. 

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 15

[30]    It is contended that for it to "appear" to the respondent that a person "may" be detrimentally implicated, requires more than the mere fact that a complaint against a person has been received. The respondent must be able to make an evaluation on the basis of sufficient information, or evidence, before she is able to conclude that it appears to her that a person may be detrimentally implicated. The word "may" must, by necessity, mean a probability rather than a distant possibility, otherwise the provision in section 7(1)(a) of the Act for a "preliminary investigation", and for the respondent to determine the most appropriate procedure in each case, becomes unnecessary and useless. It would create the possibility in certain cases that persons against whom complaints are made would be able to tamper with evidence before it has come to the respondent's attention. From a practical point of view the Legislature's intention is clear that the preliminary investigation should be completed in order to enable the Public Protector to apply her mind to consider whether the applicant may be detrimentally implicated. The preliminary stage of the proceedings is particularly important in creating an environment which does not discourage whistle-blowers. Only once objective facts have been determined, can a conclusion be derived that there are reasonable grounds to justify further action. It is only the existence of objective facts and evidence that triggers a full investigation (see in this regard Da Cruz and another v Cape Town City and another 2017 (4) SA 107 (WCC) [also reported at [2017] JOL 37346 (WCC) – Ed]). 

[31]    Having regard to the preliminary stage of the investigation it is contended that this court cannot conclude that sufficient facts were available to the respondent on which she could reasonably state that it "appears" to her that the applicant "may be implicated" to his detriment. The respondent herself says that she has not yet reached that conclusion and explicitly stated "[w]e have not reached that stage of  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 16
the investigation just as yet". The simple receipt of a complaint against someone does not mean that it automatically "appears" to the respondent that that person may be implicated to their detriment. The applicant has not been able to point to any basis on which it "ought to have" appeared to the respondent that he may be implicated to his detriment. The applicant argues that the summary of the complaint (contained in "AG2", the respondent's letter requesting information from the applicant) constitutes evidence. The respondent contends that this argument is without foundation, and that this summary is simply a list of allegations made against the applicant. The respondent submits that a mere allegation does not constitute evidence, and that there is no indication that these allegations were, at the time of the request, supported by evidence. The applicant was given the opportunity to respond to these allegations in order to place the respondent in the position to consider whether these allegations are of such a nature that the applicant "may be" implicated to his detriment. The inclusion of "preliminary investigation" in the Act's definition of "investigation" simply means that the respondent's powers in an investigation also apply to a preliminary investigation. The word "appear" used during a preliminary investigation does not carry the same meaning as when it is used after considering the evidence. Used during the course of a preliminary investigation it merely refers to the allegations contained in the complaint, which do not constitute evidence. As no evidence has yet been determined it follows automatically that there is no evidence that the applicant "may be" implicated. The respondent's letter dated 24 November 2015 and her affidavit make it clear that she is considering the complaint in the context of all the information that was made available to her during the preliminary investigation. 

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 17

[32]    The applicant also contends that his right to remain silent is implicated, as section 11(3) of the Act makes it an offence to refuse from answering a question put by the respondent, or to comply with a request or direction. The contention is that a person of whom a question has been asked is obliged to respond regardless of whether he may implicate himself. The respondent contends that there is no basis for this argument. A person may refuse to answer "with just cause" if a legitimate fear of self-incrimination can be raised. There is no averment contained in the applicant's founding affidavit that he has not answered or has withheld information due to the fact that he might incriminate himself. The applicant's explicit denial of any wrongfulness on his part completely exonerates him from any form of self-incrimination. Therefore, there is no merit in this argument. 

[33]    The applicant also submits that the respondent did not indicate any prejudice to be suffered on her part if the applicant's interpretation of section 11(3) of the Act (as set out above) is found to be correct. This submission, in my view, is based on an incorrect evaluation of the facts. In her answering affidavit the respondent explicitly referred to the fact that if this interpretation is to be followed it will seriously jeopardise the investigatory work of the respondent. The respondent also stated that disclosure of the information and documentation requested by the applicant is premature as the respondent is still in the process of establishing the legitimacy of the allegations raised in the complaint. Alternatively, the disclosure of information and documentation already sourced could create the risk of undermining any findings reached by the respondent pursuant to the investigative process. It could lead to cover-up operations with regard to omissions that have been uncovered, and/or the manufacture of evidence. It could lead to the interference with witnesses and could defeat the very purpose behind the creation of the Public Protector's  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 18
office, and hamper the respondent in her investigations. Having regard to the scheme of the Act – namely, to protect confidentiality as far as possible in order to protect the integrity of the investigative process – will create a real prejudice. As there is no replying affidavit, the respondent's version is the only version that this Court can rely upon. 

[34]    The applicant also contends that the respondent is bound by the reasons contained in the letter of 13 November 2015 and may not expand thereon. The respondent's explicit version is that she has not made a decision and therefore she could not have given "reasons" to which she could be bound. She merely provided the grounds for her preliminary view. Both letters received from the applicant's attorneys, in which information was requested from the respondent, are based on the misconception that a decision was taken. It is contended that, as this letter does not contain any reasons, the respondent is not bound by it and was, accordingly, entitled to expand thereon in her answering affidavit. 

Evaluation

[35]    Section 182(1) of the Constitution empowers the Pubic Protector and reads as follows:

"The Public Protector has the power, as regulated by national legislation– 

to investigate any conduct in state affairs, or in the public administration in any sphere of government, that is alleged or suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety or prejudice;
to report on that conduct; and
to take appropriate remedial action."  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 19

[36]    In terms of section 6 of the Public Protector Act the respondent may investigate, specify matters that she cannot investigate, or decline to investigate, and the section specifies the procedure for making complaints to the Public Protector. 

Matters that may be investigated

[37]    Section 6(4)(a) sets out the matters that the matters that the Public Protector may investigate on her own initiative or on receipt of a complaint any alleged, that is:

maladministration in connection with the affairs of government at any level;
abuse or unjustifiable exercise of power or unfair, capricious, discourteous or other improper conduct or undue delay by a person performing a public function;
improper or dishonest act, or omission or offences referred to in Part 1 to 4, or section 17, 20 or 21 (in so far as it relates to the aforementioned offences) of Chapter 2 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 2004, with respect to public money;
improper or unlawful enrichment, or receipt of any improper advantage, or promise of such enrichment or advantage, by a person as a result of an act or omission in the public administration or in connection with the affairs of government at any level or of a person performing a public function; or
act or omission by a person in the employ of government at any level, or a person performing a public function, which results in unlawful or improper prejudice to any other person."

Section 6(5) empowers the Public Protector to investigate similar misconduct within institutions in which "the State is the majority or controlling shareholder or of any public entity as defined in section 1 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999)".

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 20

Section 6(7) allows her to investigate attempts to commit the types of misconduct specified in sections 6(4) and 6(5). 

The procedure of investigation

[38]    The manner in which an investigation is to be performed is specified in section 7 of the Act and reads as follows:

"7  Investigation by Public Protector

(a) The Public Protector shall have the power, on his or her own initiative or on receipt of a complaint or an allegation or on the ground of information that has come to his or her knowledge and which points to conduct such as referred to in section 6(4) or (5) of this Act, to conduct a preliminary investigation for the purpose of determining the merits of the complaint, allegation or information and the manner in which the matter concerned should be dealt with.
(i) The format and the procedure to be followed in conducting any investigation shall be determined by the Public Protector with due regard to the circumstances of each case.
The Public Protector may direct that any category of persons or all persons whose presence is not desirable, shall not be present at any proceedings pertaining to any investigation or part thereof.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law no person shall disclose to any other person the contents of any document in the possession of a member of the office of the Public Protector or the record of any evidence given before the Public Protector, the Deputy Public Protector or a person contemplated in subsection (3)(b) during an investigation, unless the Public Protector determines otherwise. 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 21
(a) The Public Protector may, at any time prior to or during an investigation, request any person–
at any level of government, subject to any law governing the terms and conditions of employment of such person;
performing a public function, subject to any law governing the terms and conditions of the appointment of such person; or
otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Protector, 

to assist him or her, under his or her supervision and control, in the performance of his or her functions with regard to a particular investigation or investigations in general.

(i) The Public Protector may designate any person to conduct an investigation or any part thereof on his or her behalf and to report to him or her and for that purpose such a person shall have such powers as the Public Protector may delegate to him or her.
The provisions of section 9 and of the regulations and instructions issued by the Treasury under section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999), in respect of Commissions of Inquiry, shall apply with the necessary changes in respect of that person.
(a) For the purposes of conducting an investigation the Public Protector may direct any person to submit an affidavit or affirmed declaration or to appear before him or her to give evidence or to produce any document in his or her possession or under his or her control which has a bearing on the matter being investigated, and may examine such person.
The Public Protector or any person duly authorised thereto by him or her may request an explanation from any person whom he  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 22
or she reasonably suspects of having information which has a bearing on a matter being or to be investigated.
A direction referred to in subsection (4)(a) shall be by way of a subpoena containing particulars of the matter in connection with which the person subpoenaed is required to appear before the Public Protector and shall be signed by the Public Protector and served on the person subpoenaed either by a registered letter sent through the post or by delivery by a person authorised thereto by the Public Protector.
The Public Protector may require any person appearing as a witness before him or her under subsection (4) to give evidence on oath or after having made an affirmation.
The Public Protector or any person authorised by him or her in writing may administer an oath to or accept an affirmation from any such person.
Any person appearing before the Public Protector by virtue of the provisions of subsection (4) may be assisted at such examination by an advocate or an attorney and shall be entitled to peruse such of the documents or records referred to in subsection (2) as are reasonably necessary to refresh his or her memory.
(a) If it appears to the Public Protector during the course of an investigation that any person is being implicated in the matter being investigated and that such implication may be to the detriment of that person or that an adverse finding pertaining to that person may result, the Public Protector shall afford such person an opportunity to respond in connection therewith, in any manner that may be expedient under the circumstances.
(i) If such implication forms part of the evidence submitted to the Public Protector during an appearance in terms of  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 23
the provisions of subsection (4), such person shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard in connection therewith by way of giving evidence.
Such person or his or her legal representative shall be entitled, through the Public Protector, to question other witnesses, determined by the Public Protector, who have appeared before the Public Protector in terms of this section.
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any person referred to in subsection (9).
The Public Protector may make rules in respect of any matter referred to in this section which has a bearing on an investigation or in respect of any matter incidental thereto, provided that such rules must be published in the Government Gazette and tabled in the National Assembly."

The investigation process

[39]    Section 6(1) specifies the way in which an investigation by the Public Protector may be initiated. It specifically provides that a complaint must be contained in a written or oral declaration, under oath or after having made an affirmation. The said declaration must contain specified information as required, which I do not find necessary to deal with at this stage. 

[40]    The respondent's version is that, in the present case, the respondent is in the so-called default position as envisaged by section 6(3). She is in the process of gathering information. The gathering of information is part of the mandate under which the respondent operates. It requires no decision. It is merely an interim phase where a function is performed as envisaged by section 239(b) of the Constitution.

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 24

Performing a function does not constitute a decision. It is an exercise of power authorised by the Constitution. The respondent's contention is further that the applicant's rights are not afflicted [sic] and that the process of investigation is not reviewable while still at the investigative stage, but only at the deliberative stage. The procedure adopted by other institutions – to which the applicant compares the procedure adopted by the respondent – is not relevant. Firstly, those institutions are distinguishable from the respondent in nature, obligation, and function. In terms of the Public Protector Act the respondent is entitled and obliged to determine special procedures to investigate the complaints she receives, because complaints are often received by whistle-blowers who must be protected, and to ensure that whistle-blowers are not discouraged from making complaints because of fear of exposure. Secondly, the respondent's investigative powers are far broader. The sheer volume of complaints received requires a kind of sifting process to ensure the integrity of the respondent's investigations, to protect the persons who have been complained against, and to protect the respondent from wasting resources on spurious complaints. 

The obligation to investigate a complaint

[41]    In Steenkamp and another v Central Energy Fund Soc Ltd and others 2018 (1) SA 311 (WCC) at paragraph [37] Bozalek J held:

"The first question which thus arises is whether the impugned decision amounted to administrative action. In President of the Republic of South Africa and Others v South African Rugby Football Union and Others (SARFU) [2000 (1) SA 1 (CC) [also reported at 1999 (10) BCLR 1059 (CC) – Ed]] the Constitutional Court held that a determination of whether action is administrative action or not should be decided on a case-by-case basis. It held further that the source of the power, the nature of the power, its subject-matter, whether it involves the  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 25
exercise of a public duty, and how closely it is related to policy matters (which are not administrative) or to the implementation of legislation (which is characteristic of administrative action), are all relevant considerations to be considered in the analysis. The court stated:

'What matters is not so much the functionary as the function. The question is whether the task itself is administrative or not . . . The focus of the enquiry as to whether conduct is administrative action is not on the arm of government to which the relevant actor belongs, but on the nature of the power he or she is exercising.'"

[42]    Section 239 of the Constitution, defines an organ of state as: 

any department of state or administration in the national, provincial or local sphere of government; or
any other functionary or institution–
exercising a power or performing a function in terms of the Constitution or a provincial constitution; or
exercising a public power or performing a public function in terms of any legislation."

[43]    In Minister of Home Affairs and another v Public Protector of the Republic of South Africa (308/2017) [2018] ZASCA 15 [also reported at [2018] JOL 39715 (SCA) – Ed] (15 March 2018) the Supreme Court of Appeal extensively considered whether the application of PAJA, which forms the basis for the review in this matter, should be applied in matters concerning the Public Protector. The court concluded in paragraph [34]:

"[34]  The Office of the Public Protector is not a department of state or administration and neither can it be said to be part of the national, provincial or local spheres of government: it is an independent body  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 26
that is answerable only to the National Assembly. It is therefore not an organ of state as contemplated by subsection (a) of the definition . . ."

The court then continues to say in paragraphs [34]–[36] that:

"[34]  . . . It is, however, an institution that exercises both constitutional powers and public powers in terms of legislation. It is, consequently, an organ of state as contemplated by subsection (b) of the definition.

[35]    The completed process of an investigation by the Public Protector that has found official misconduct and ordered remedial action will usually adversely affect rights and have a direct, external legal effect. The investigative, reporting and remedial powers of the Public Protector are public powers that derive from both the Constitution and ordinary parliamentary legislation. None of the express exclusions from the definition apply to the Public Protector. 

[36]    Administrative action concerns the taking of a decision. The type of decision envisaged is a decision 'of an administrative nature'. This is so because administrative action generally involves 'the conduct of the bureaucracy (whoever the bureaucratic functionary might be) in carrying out the daily functions of the State'. While I accept that public administration in a modern state encompasses an extremely wide range of activities, including investigative functions and the exercise of powers of compulsion, I am of the view that the factors listed below distinguish the decisions of the Public Protector from decisions of an administrative nature." 

[44]    In paragraph [37] of the judgment the SCA elaborates on the "factors" referred to above. It is concluded that the Office of the Public Protector is: 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 27
(a) a unique institution designed to strengthen constitutional democracy;

a purpose-built watch-dog, acting independently and answerable only to the National Assembly, 
not a department of state and is functionally separate from the state administration – it is only an organ of state because it exercises constitutional powers and statutory powers of a public nature;
not designed to administer but to investigate, report on, and remedy maladministration;
given broad discretionary powers as to the complaints it accepts, the allegations of maladministration it chooses to investigate, how to investigate such, and the remedial action to be ordered. 

[45]    The SCA further concludes that the Public Protector is not a court – it does not exercise judicial power and cannot be equated with a court. Her role is completely different to that of a court and the jurisdictional arrangements of the courts are entirely irrelevant in a determination of the Public Protector's jurisdiction. In relation to the nature of the Public Protector's discretion, the court concluded that, in terms of section 182 of the Constitution, the Public Protector has a mandate to "investigate any conduct in state affairs, or in the public administration in any sphere of government, that is alleged or suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety or prejudice"; and to report on that conduct and "take appropriate remedial action". The Public Protector Act widens this already wide mandate even more, extending the Public Protector's remit to investigation, on her own initiative, of maladministration and similar maladies in respect of, for instance, "the affairs of government at any level" or a "person performing a public function", and also in respect of state-owned enterprises and other public entities. The Office of the  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 28
Public Protector is called upon to satisfy this mandate, and the decision to investigate is not a consensual process. The court held that while the jurisdiction conferred upon the Public Protector is extremely wide, her mandate is clear: she must seek out and effect the rectification of maladministration through directing appropriate remedial steps so as to ensure good governance. Within this context, the wide discretion vested in her enables her to achieve this end (see paragraphs [44]–[46] of the judgment in this regard). 

[46]    In short, the SCA concluded that the above factors point away from decisions of the Public Protector being of an administrative nature and therefore constituting administrative action. Consequently, it was held that PAJA does not apply to the review of exercises of power by the Public Protector in terms of section 182 of the Constitution and section 6 of the Public Protector Act. 

[47]    Applying the ratio decidendi pronounced in Minister of Home Affairs and another v Public Protector of the Republic of South Africa, supra, the following is clear: the Constitution and the Public Protector Act place a duty on the Public Protector to investigate, either on her own initiative or on receipt of a complaint or an allegation which points to conduct referred to in sections 6(4) or 6(5) of the Act. It includes the power to conduct a preliminary investigation for the purposes of determining the merits of the complaint or allegation and the manner in which the matter concerned should be dealt with. Section 7(1)(b)(i) gives the respondent a broad discretion in determining how to conduct the investigation. The word "may" clearly refers to the format and procedure adopted. It includes he conduction of a preliminary investigation.

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 29

[48]    Section 7(9) of the Act holds that the respondent must provide any person who may be implicated by her findings with an opportunity to respond in connection therewith. The manner in which the opportunity to respond is given is left for determination by the respondent, in light of the circumstances of the case. 

[49]    On conclusion of an investigation the respondent has to report on the conduct investigated and take appropriate remedial action in terms of sections 182(1)(b) and 182(1)(c) of the Constitution. 

[50]    In her opposing affidavit the respondent explained that during the investigation a number of methods are used to gather information, including interviews and meetings, a review of relevant correspondence, the perusal and analysis of relevant documents, and a consideration of the applicable legislation and other prescripts. Interviews are conducted either by the respondent herself, a duly delegated member of her staff, or an independent person. 

[51]    When it appears to the respondent, during the course of an investigation, that a person is implicated by the investigation and that such implication may be to his/her detriment, or that an adverse finding may be made against such person, the respondent will inform the affected person of the implication and provide him/her with an opportunity to respond. Taking into account that the complaint against the applicant was lodged in June 2015 and the applicant was informed about this complaint on 17 June 2015, it must be accepted as a fact that the applicant was informed of – and requested to respond to – the complaint very soon after it was received. Therefore, I can safely conclude that on 17 June 2015 the investigation process was in a preliminary stage before any provisional or final decision was  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 30
taken. The respondent will, after completion of the preliminary investigation and if it appears to her that the applicant may be implicated to his detriment, by way of letter communicate her preliminary findings based on the information sourced during the investigation process, and will propose remedial action in light of these findings. The affected individuals are thereby provided with a further opportunity to present any additional evidence to the respondent. The respondent also provides the complainant with an opportunity to submit any further comments on the matter being investigated, should he/she wish to do so. 

[52]    After considering the comments and/or additional information received, the respondent, with the assistance of her staff, integrates the comments and evaluates them, following which the respondent edits and completes the final report. Subsequent to that event the final report is published and made accessible to the public, unless there are special considerations that require that it be kept confidential. 

[53]    The investigation process is still in the preliminary stage and essentially comprises of an information-gathering exercise. The investigative process is a fact-finding mission which includes personal interaction and engagement with the complainant, the applicant, and factual witnesses. This was confirmed on 24 July 2015 when the applicant was informed as per Annexure "AG3" that her investigation was still in its preliminary stages which involved the gathering of the relevant information. In the same letter the applicant was further advised that he would be invited to appear before the respondent at a date to be arranged in the future and at which engagement he would be presented with the information and evidence that had been sourced during the information-gathering process.

 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 31

[54]    The applicant was further informed that if it appeared to the respondent, during the course of her investigation, that he was being implicated and that such implication could be to his detriment or that an adverse finding could be made against him, the respondent would afford the applicant a further opportunity to respond. She reiterated that it was only once she had evidence implicating the applicant, and which would result in an adverse finding being made against him, that she would share the details thereof with him, as required in terms of section 7(9) of the Act. 

[55]    The uncontested evidence of the respondent is that the preliminary process, ie to investigate, is to determine whether there is a real and definite possibility that there are sufficient merits in the allegations which require a response from the applicant.

[56]    In my view, the respondent is correct in her interpretation of the phrase "preliminary investigation", as contained in the Act's definition of "investigation", to mean that the respondent's powers in an investigation also apply in a preliminary investigation. The respondent is entitled to determine the appropriate format or procedure of any investigation. The respondent is therefore also entitled, as well as obligated, to do so for preliminary investigations. There is nothing on the papers before me to contradict the respondent's version that an investigation firstly consists of a preliminary stage, and thereafter a final stage. Should it emerge during the preliminary stage of the investigation that a person's rights might be detrimentally affected, this preliminary finding will be communicated to same person before the final investigation stage commences. Such a person will then be given the opportunity to respond to any of the preliminary findings made during the preliminary stage of the investigation. An investigation depends on the information  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 32
available. Information consists of various forms. Before information can be regarded as reliable and acceptable, the Public Protector is obliged to conduct a preliminary investigation to determine the admissibility and reliability of the information in order to ascertain its substance. The process of investigation is left in the discretion of the Public Protector.

[57]    This decision-making process is to some extent similar to what was said in Minister of Home Affairs and another v Austin and another 1986 (4) SA 281 (ZS) [also reported at [1986] 4 All SA 457 (ZS) – Ed] where Dumbutshena CJ held:

"In my view the Minister must look at the objective facts in order to arrive at the conclusion that reasonable grounds existed justifying detention. There must be sufficient information and material upon which to act, that is, in the exercise of his discretion. 

The Court, in its approach to the assessment of facts or any evidence, must be satisfied that those facts and evidence exist to justify the detention. That approach by the Court is objective."

[58]    In Da Cruz and another v Cape Town City and another, supra, Binns-Ward J held that where a statute uses a "subjective form", for example that something must "appear" to the decision-maker, or the decision-maker must "be satisfied" of something, that subjective judgment must be reached on the basis of the existence of facts (see at paragraph [34]). Binns-Ward J held that this requirement is now included in section 6(2) of PAJA.

[59]    There is no basis on which this Court can conclude that, on 17 June 2015, sufficient facts were available to the respondent on which she could reasonably state that it "appears" to her that the applicant "may" be implicated to his detriment. To the contrary, in her letter dated 13 November 2015 the respondent clearly states that  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 33
she has not yet reached that conclusion as "[w]e have not reached that stage of the investigation just as yet".

[60]    The duty to institute a preliminary investigation in order to objectively determine whether there are sufficient facts to enable the Public Protector to make a decision in connection with allegations falling within the scope of her mandate, cannot be regarded as a decision which is reviewable in terms of PAJA. On the facts before me the respondent has not yet applied her mind and therefore had not made any decision regarding the facts before her. Accordingly, no administrative decision was taken 

[61]    There is, in my view, no basis for the applicant's contention that his right to remain silent is implicated by section 11(3) of the Act. It is not a criminal case. The applicant contends that a person of whom a question has been asked is obliged to respond regardless of whether he may implicate himself. However, as the respondent rightly argued, such a person may refuse to answer "with just cause", for instance if a legitimate fear of self-incrimination is raised. 

[62]    The applicant contends that the summary of the complaint contained in the respondent's letter dated 17 June 2015 constitutes evidence, and holds sufficient evidence on which it must "appear" to the respondent that the applicant may be implicated to his detriment. This argument is also without merit. The summary is nothing but a list of the allegations made against the applicant in the complaint which was received. There is no referral to, or indication of, evidence which was provided in support of those allegations. In the absence of facts indicating that evidence of any nature served before the respondent – neither at the time when  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 34
the various letters were written, nor at the time the application was brought – on the basis of which it could have "appeared" to the respondent that the applicant "may" be implicated to his detriment, this ground of review must fail. 

[63]    The respondent had not yet made a decision, and had therefore not given "reasons" to which she could have been bound. In the notice of motion no request is made to provide reasons for the alleged decision. In the absence of a decision, the respondent was entitled to expand, in her answering affidavit, on what is contained in her letter dated 13 November 2015, to the extent that she has done so. The answering affidavit therefore contains the reasons for her request to the applicant and must be accepted as such (see in this regard Steenkamp and another v Central Energy Fund Soc Ltd and others, supra, at paragraph [71] where it was held:

"In my view there was no discrepancy in the reasons furnished by the CEF for the impugned decision. The grounds for possible termination initially set out by the CEF in March 2017 were not reasons for the impugned decision but merely the grounds for their preliminary view."

[64]    The applicant submitted that other institutions have to provide a complete copy of a complaint to the person against whom a complaint is received. Therefore the respondent must also do so. It is contended by the applicant that the respondent's attitude, by refusing same, is highly prejudicial to the applicant. The procedure in other institutions is irrelevant for several reasons. Those institutions are distinguishable from the respondent in both nature and function. The respondent is entitled and obliged to determine special procedures for investigating the complaints received by her Office. Complaints are often received by whistle-blowers who must be protected rather than discouraged from making complaints due to fear of exposure. The respondent's investigative powers are far broader than that of other  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 35
institutions. The number of complaints received by the respondent requires an effective process of selection and scrutinising, both to ensure the integrity of the respondent's investigations, and to protect the respondent, as well as the persons who have been complained against, from wasting resources on spurious complaints. 

[65]    Inasmuch as it is alleged that the applicant will encounter reputational damage, such allegation is based on a media report, the source of which is unknown. While it is regrettable that the allegations against the applicant became public, this cannot change the respondent's entitlement in law to keep documents confidential, nor does it make the respondent's decision to do so unlawful. 

[66]    The respondent's determination not to provide the applicant with certain documents at this stage of the investigation is not unreasonable. In Bato Star Fishing (Pty) Ltd v Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and others 2004 (4) SA 490 (CC) [also reported at 2004 (7) BCLR 687 (CC) – Ed] at 513B–D it was held:

"What will constitute a reasonable decision will depend on the circumstances of each case, much as what will constitute a fair procedure will depend on the circumstances of each case. Factors relevant to determining whether a decision is reasonable or not will include the nature of the decision, the identity and expertise of the decision-maker, the range of factors relevant to the decision, the reasons given for the decision, the nature of the competing interests involved and the impact of the decision on the lives and well-being of those affected."

Considering what is reasonable therefore requires a measure of deference. Deference has been described by the SCA in Logbro Properties CC v Bedderson NO and others 2003 (2) SA 460 (SCA) at paragraphs [21]–[22] as follows: 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 36
" . . . a judicial willingness to appreciate the legitimate and constitutionally-ordained province of administrative agencies; to admit the expertise of those agencies in policy-laden or polycentric issues; to accord their interpretation of fact and law with due respect; and to be sensitive in general to the interests legitimately pursued by administrative bodies and the practical and financial constraints under which they operate. This type of deference is perfectly consistent with a concern for individual rights and a refusal to tolerate corruption and maladministration. It ought to be shaped not by an unwillingness to scrutinize administrative action, but by a careful weighing up of the need for – and the consequences of – judicial intervention. Above all, it ought to be shaped by a conscious determination not to usurp the functions of administrative agencies; not to cross over from review to appeal."

[67]    On the facts before me, it is not in dispute that the applicant is entitled to certain information in order to protect his rights; but at a point later on in the investigation process, ie when protecting his rights become[s] an issue; it is therefore not at all unreasonable for the respondent to choose to refuse to proffer this information during the investigatory process. In Shabalala and others v Attorney-General, Transvaal and another 1996 (1) SA 725 (CC) [also reported at [1997] JOL 25 (CC) – Ed] Mahomed DP held that:

"The State is entitled to resist a claim by the accused for access to any particular document in the police docket on the grounds that such access is not justified for the purposes of enabling the accused properly to exercise his or her right to a fair trial or on the ground that it has reason to believe that there is a reasonable risk that access to the relevant document would lead to the disclosure of the identity of an informer or State secrets or on the grounds that there  
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 37
was a reasonable risk that such disclosure might lead to the intimidation of witnesses or otherwise prejudice the proper ends of justice."

The potential harm to the process outweighs the potential damage to the applicant. The applicant may be correct in his submission that the sooner he is able to clear his name, the better for him; on the other hand the Office of the Public Protector is a public body performing its constitutional functions in the public interest. The respondent must always have regard to what is best not merely for the applicant, or any other individual named in a complaint, but what is best for public interest. This includes the respondent being able to conduct her investigations without fear, favour or prejudice, and being able to guard against interference at the preliminary stages. Accordingly, in my view, the refusal to grant any further information during the preliminary process meets the standard of reasonableness. 

[68]    The applicant also seeks an order that the respondent's decision to refuse information be reviewed as an exercise of public power under the principles of legality. I have already found, for the reasons set out above, that the decisions – if it can be called such – were lawful, rational and justifiable and a review is not competent at this stage of the proceedings.

[69]    In paragraph 4 of his notice of motion the applicant seeks an order that he be granted the right to cross-examine witnesses who have been interviewed by the respondent during her investigation. Section 7(9)(b)(ii) does not entitle the applicant to cross-examine witnesses. It specifically states "such person or his or her legal representative shall be entitled, through the Public Protector, to question other witnesses, determined by the Public Protector, who have appeared before the 
[2018] JOL 40338 (GP) at 38
Public Protector in terms of this right. Such a request was never made to the respondent, neither in the applicant's letter dated 30 September 2015, nor in his letter dated 2 November 2015. The applicant is thus not seeking to set aside and substitute the decision of the respondent in this regard. Accordingly, this order cannot be granted.

[70]    Accordingly, the following order is made:

The application is dismissed with costs.

Appearance:
Adv A den Haartog, Ranamane Mokalane Incorporated (At); Adv S Yacoob, Bowman Gilfillan Incorporated (R)


End of Document