



Hemraj v Columbus Retirement Fund and others [2022] 5 BPLR 93 (PFA)
Pensions Law Reports

Division: Tribunal of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
Case No: PFA/GP/00076225/2021/TAM
Date: 28/10/2021
Before: MP Thulare, Deputy Pension Funds Adjudicator
Keywords


Employee Benefits and Retirement — Pensions — Withdrawal benefits — Withholding of — Lawfulness.

Editor’s Summary


By virtue of his employment, the complainant was a member of the provident section and pension section of a retirement fund (“the funds”). Upon his resignation, he became entitled to withdrawal benefits from the funds. However, the funds withheld the  withdrawal benefits, at the instance of the employer, pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956. The employer had requested the funds to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits due to loss it suffered as a result of the complainant’s alleged fraudulent conduct.

Seeking payment of his benefits, the complainant pointed to the lengthy delay and the fact that he was not provided with updates.

Held that the issue for determination was whether the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits by the funds was in line with the provisions of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.

As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Act. On a plain reading of the provision, section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act does not authorise the withholding of a member’s benefit where he is potentially liable for theft, fraud or misconduct against the employer. However, it has been held that to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording must be interpreted purposively to include the power to withhold payment of a member's pension benefits pending the determination or acknowledgement of such member's liability. The process of balancing the competing interests can be achieved by assessing the potential harm that will be suffered by the employee if the remedy provided in section 37D(1)(b)(ii) is granted as compared with the potential harm to the employer if the remedy is not granted. The period of withholding must be reasonable, and what constitutes a reasonable period will differ depending on the circumstances of each case. On receiving a request from an employer to withhold a member’s benefits, the fund must solicit representations from the member prior to withholding the member’s benefits. The actions of the funds to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits prior to obtaining representations from the complainant fell short of that requirement. Thus, the funds had exercised their discretion improperly.

The funds were ordered to pay the complainant’s withdrawal benefit, inclusive of fund return earned on such benefits calculated from 2 January 2021 to date of payment, less any permissible deductions, within two weeks.

____________________________________________________________________________________

MP Thulare

Determination in terms of section 30M of the Pension Funds Act, 24 of 1956 (“the Act”)

[1]    Introduction

This complaint concerns the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act by the funds in line with the employer’s request.
The complaint was received by the Adjudicator on 10 May 2021. On 12 May 2021, the complainant was informed that the complaint was referred to the respondents for possible resolution. On the same date, the complaint was sent to the respondents giving them until 12 June 2021 to resolve the complaint. The funds filed their response on 1 June 2021. The employer filed its response on 11 June 2021. On 22 June 2021, following the lapse of the period afforded the respondents to resolve the complaint, receipt of confirmation of the complaint was sent to the complainant. On the same date, copies of the respondents’ responses were sent to the complainant, affording him until 6 July 2021 to comment thereon. On the same date, the respondents were requested to file formal responses by 22 July 2021. On 21 July 2021, the funds filed their formal response. On 6 July 2021, the complainant made further submissions. On 10 October 2021, 12 October 2021 and 21 October 2021, the fund made further submissions. On 20 October 2021, the employer made further submissions.
After considering the written submissions before the Adjudicator it is considered unnecessary to hold a hearing in this matter. The determination and reasons therefor appear below.

[2]    Factual background

The complainant was employed with the employer from 7 July 1997 to 1 December 2020. He was a member of the funds by virtue of his employment.
Upon his resignation, the complainant became entitled to withdrawal benefits from the funds. He has fund credits of R1 617 664.05 in the Columbus Retirement Fund (Provident Section) (“provident fund”) and R1 306 799.93 in the Columbus Retirement Fund (Pension Section) (“pension fund”). The funds withheld the complainant’s withdrawal benefits, at the instance of the employer, pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act. The employer requested the funds to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits due to loss it suffered as a result of the complainant’s alleged fraudulent conduct.

[3]    Complaint

The complainant submitted that he resigned from the employer after an investigation was instituted against him and after he found the continued relationship with the employer intolerable. He stated that the funds have withheld his withdrawal benefits for over six months following his exit from employment. He considers this time unreasonably lengthy. He stated that he is also not provided with any updates concerning the progress of the case against him.
The complainant provided a copy of his benefit statement as at 22 April 2021 which reflects fund credits of R1 617 664.05 in the pension fund and R1 306 799.93 in the provident fund.
The complainant attached a copy of email communication that he had with the funds between March 2021 and April 2021. In the communication, the complainant informed the funds that he resigned from the employer on 1 December 2020 and submitted his claim forms for payment of his withdrawal benefit. Further, that the employer informed him that his withdrawal benefits may be withheld by the funds pending an investigation by the employer. The complainant informed the funds that almost four months had lapsed since his exit from employment without payment of his withdrawal benefits. The funds informed the complainant that payment of his withdrawal benefits was delayed, in line with section 37D of the Act, pending the outcome of the investigation by the employer.
The complainant requests the Adjudicator to investigate the matter and order the funds to pay his withdrawal benefits.

[4]    Responses

Funds’ response

The funds submitted that in March 2021, they informed the complainant that his withdrawal benefits would be withheld pending finalisation of investigations by the employer in terms of section 37D of the Act.
The funds submitted that the employer rejected some invoices from a service provider after discovering that there was an irregular relationship between the complainant and the said service provider. They stated that said relationship led to the damage suffered by the employer.
The funds submitted that a letter was sent to the complainant on behalf of the employer on 14 April 2021. They stated that said letter informed the complainant that the employer’s investigations have affirmed his misconduct that caused loss to the employer. Further, that the funds have accepted the request from the employer to withhold his withdrawal benefits. The funds requested the Adjudicator to permit them to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits in favour of the employer. They stated that they will withhold the benefits proportional to the damages claimed by the employer to protect the complainant’s rights as envisaged under section 37A of the Act.

Employer response

The employer submitted that the complainant has been its employee from 1 July 1998 until his resignation on 2 December 2020. It stated that he resigned following an investigation into his conduct.
The employer submitted that the complainant caused loss to it as envisaged under section 37D(1)(b)(ii), as a consequence of which it believes his withdrawal benefits in the funds must be withheld and eventually paid to it.
The employer submitted that the complainant admitted to “moonlighting” to a service provider that the employer is currently in litigation against. However, that he has not admitted liability for causing it loss. The employer states that it has instituted civil and criminal proceedings against the complainant. The employer submitted that the loss caused by the complainant to it is more than R6 000 000.00.
The employer submitted that it is part of Acerinox Group of companies. Further that Acerinox Group has a code of conduct that binds the employer and its employees. It stated that the complainant breached the code of conduct.
The employer submitted that the complainant was employed in positions where he was able to influence procurement. It submitted that in late 2020, a whistle-blower informed the employer’s ethics committee of the following:
The complainant is related to an owner of the employer’s service provider, PDK Global Enterprise (Pty) Ltd (“PDK”);
The complainant’s brother worked for the employer’s service provider, Rhine Ruhr Pumps and Valves (Pty) Ltd (“RR Pumps”) and he previously worked for ASW Engineering (Pty) Ltd (“ASW”), another service provider;
The complainant was close friends with, and supported, a former engineer of ASW, who also consulted to PDK and RR Pumps over different periods;
The complainant and other officials of the employer informed Elwood Corporation (“Elwood”), an original equipment manufacturer and service provider, that Elwood must provide quotes to the employer through PDK only whenever the employer procures Elwood products.
The employer submitted that the complainant was suspended on 13 November 2020. Further, that on 16 November 2020, he admitted to the employer that he “moonlighted” to PDK and requested that he be permitted to resign or to be dismissed. It stated that the complainant informed some of its officials that he rendered services to Scaw Metals on behalf of PDK while employed with the employer.
The employer submitted that on 2 December 2020, the complainant resigned immediately, but presented himself to the employer on 3 December where the confirmed that the owner of PDK is his sister and that he rendered services to PDK’s clients while employed with the employer for which he received compensation.
The employer submitted that it instituted investigations which indicated that the complainant breached its code of conduct and caused loss to it. Further, that the full extent of the loss caused to it will be determined once it and the police have concluded their investigations.
The employer submitted that it also established that the complainant exercised de facto control of the operations of PDK between 17 March 2016 and 31 December 2020, despite being employed with it. It states that the complainant’s brother was also employed with ASW and RR Pumps at different times. Further, that the complainant confirmed that he is an employee of RR Pumps and a former employee of ASW.
The employer submitted that the complainant informed it that he did not know that he had to declare his interests in ASW or RR Pumps.

 Further, that he stated that he forgot to declare his interests in PDK. It also stated that it established that the complainant motivated for PDK to become a service provider of the employer without disclosing his interests therein. Further, that the complainant sent a word version of the profile of PDK to the employer and the metadata of the document shows that the complainant edited the document on the same date that he sent it to the employer.

The employer submitted that, in September 2018, the complainant misrepresented to Elwood that its agreement with the employer was cancelled. It stated that this misrepresentation was to ensure that PDK would supply Elwood products to the employer. Further, that the complainant induced the employer’s key personnel to sign a sole supplier form reflecting that PDK was the sole supplier of Elwood products to the employer in South Africa. It stated that the appointment of PDK as the sole supplier of Elwood products, which was instigated by the complainant, impacted on the employer’s procurement options. It further stated that the complainant was involved in the appointment of RR Pumps as the sole or preferred supplier of Ebara Pumps, which also impacted the employer’s procurement options.
The employer submitted that its investigations have revealed a letter from a supplier in China in which, inter alia, the complainant is recorded as the owner of RR Pumps and that he would travel to China to further the business of RR Pumps. It states that in its communication with RR Pumps, RR Pumps denied the accuracy of the content of the letter. However, the employer states that it has determined that the complainant took leave over a period that overlapped with the travel periods to China stated in the letter. Further, that the complainant’s electronic data reflects that he indeed travelled to China over the relevant period.
The employer submits that its investigations reveal that the complainant took measures to ensure that orders were allocated to PDK. It states that it is finalising summons to make the following claims against the complainant:
Claim for the amount of R5 530 867.82, caused by an excessive markup levied by PDK on an order for rider bars. The complainant communicated with the supplier of the rider bars to PDK as the quotes from the supplier reflected PDK as the purchaser and the complainant as the contact person;
The amount of R145 935.56 caused by excessive markup levied by PDK on backwash filter orders. The complainant was involved in the creation of PDK’s invoice to the employer;
The amount of R353 330.76 in respect of numerous cover quotes. The companies that the complainant is affiliated with provided quotes that were higher than PDK to ensure that PDK’s quotes were lower and acceptable in comparison to the cover quotes.
The employer submitted that the criminal case it opened against the complainant was opened in Mpumalanga and it would ask the court to make a compensation order in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act against the complainant for the loss he caused to it.

Complainant’s further submissions

The complainant responded to the employer and funds’ responses. He stated that he sent communication to the funds on 18 March 2021 requesting an update on the payment of his withdrawal benefits. He states that the funds informed him that they are withholding his withdrawal benefits in terms of section 37D, albeit the funds informed him four months after he left employment. Further that to date he has not received formal communication from the funds concerning the payment of his withdrawal benefits.
The complainant submitted that he has requested the funds to inform him what the acceptable duration to withhold benefits is and to be provided with progress reports, but he has not been responded to. He states that the funds are not conducting this matter in an impartial manner.
The complainant submitted that the fund’s administrator, Global Employee Benefits (Pty) Ltd, conducts itself in a manner that gives him the impression that its primary objective in this matter is to protect the interests of the fund only. Further, that he did not receive the letter that the administrator stated that it sent to him on 14 April 2021. He requested that said letter be shared with him.
The complainant confirmed that he attended the interview mentioned by the employer, in the employer’s submissions to this office, in December 2020. He further states that he shared most of the information that is contained in the employer’s response and finds it strange that the employer states that it unearthed his relationship with PDK.
The complainant submits that he carried out his duties as a technician satisfactorily. Further that he was not part of the procurement department. He stated that it is the duty of the procurement department to verify goods that said department procures. He stated that there are 5 people in the employer’s procurement department who approve the procurement of goods. Further, that the persons in the procurement department must be investigated and the employer must claim the pension benefits of the guilty persons within the procurement department and not himself.
The complainant submits that the employer has a number of service providers additional to the ones that it identified in its response to the Adjudicator. Further, that he has raised concerns about the quality of supply from one of the service providers, yet they are still a service provider. He also states that the service provider provides gifts and getaways to the employer’s employees to ensure that its services are not terminated.
The complainant submitted that the employer’s claims are based on assumptions without any proof. He submits that the South African Police Service (“SAPS”) have not contacted him concerning the criminal case that the employer states that it opened against him.
The complainant submitted that ASW was replaced as a service provider to the employer by PDK because PDK supplied similar goods at a cheaper rate than ASW. He stated that the owner of ASW has a close relationship with some senior managers within the employer. He stated that he brought this information to the employer’s attention and is unaware whether any action was taken by the employer.
The employer submitted that some of the employer’s senior officials are unjustifiably pursuing him. He stated that he remains unemployed. Further, that he has been informed that employers tend to delay the finalisation of cases as a way to pressure former employees into entering into unreasonable settlements.

Funds’ further submissions

The funds reiterated that the employer requested them to withhold the complainant’s benefits as provided for in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act for the fraud, dishonesty misconduct or theft that caused the employer loss of over R6 000 000.00.
The funds submitted that the boards considered the request to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits. The decision was made to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits as permitted by rule 16.1.4, with the guidance set out in the Highveld Steel and Vanadium Corporation Ltd v Oosthuizen [2009] 1 BPLR 1 (SCA) (“Highveld”) [also reported at [2009] 2 All SA 225 (SCA); [2008] JOL 22846 (SCA) – Ed].
The funds submitted that the employer informed them that it has instituted civil and criminal proceedings against the complainant following its investigations that revealed that the complainant has perpetrated misconduct and fraud that caused it loss. The funds attached a copy of the summons issued by the employer against the complainant. The summons raises claims against the complainant as set out in paragraph 4.16 above.
The funds submitted that they informed the complainant of the employer’s request to withhold his withdrawal benefits as required under rule 16.1.4. They attached the complainant’s response to the notification. In his response, dated 14 July 2021, the complainant stated that the employer does not have any claim against his withdrawal benefits because he has not caused any loss to the employer. He submitted that the employer may have issued summons only to frustrate him and should not be permitted to hide behind pending potential litigation as a way to deny him access to his withdrawal benefits.
The funds submitted that, after considering the requests from the employer, the complainant’s response to the requests and its rules, they are satisfied that the employer has made out a prima facie case for the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits.
The funds submit that the boards are satisfied that they have complied with the law and their rules. The funds state that they continue to monitor the progress of the employer’s claims in the courts so that the boards can reconsider their decision to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits if circumstances warrant same.
The funds submitted that they engaged with the complainant in March 2021, as corroborated by the complainant’s submissions under paragraph 3.3 above. The funds submitted that they followed up with the employer telephonically concerning progress with the investigation into the complainant’s conduct. The funds also state that the complainant has failed to make representations other than to state that the employer’s claims are baseless. The funds also stated that the complainant has not responded to the allegations made against him by the employer.
The funds submitted that they have attempted to balance the interests of both the complainant and the employer and will continue to do so. Further, that it would be irresponsible for the fund to pay the complainant’s benefit given the seriousness of the charges against him.

Employer’s further submissions

The employer submitted that the complainant did not respond to its letter, ostensibly of 14 April 2021, that set out the allegations it made against him. Further, that this indicates that the complainant admits to the content of the letter.
The employer submitted that a summons was issued against the complainant and served on him on 14 July 2021 and he has not given notice of his intention to defend the action. Further, that it will apply for default judgment.
The employer submitted that it is suing the complainant for amounts in excess of R6 000 000.00, which is substantially in excess of the amounts being withheld by the funds in respect of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits.
The employer submitted that it has a reasonable apprehension of irreparable harm or loss if the complainant’s withdrawal benefits are paid to him by the funds and that it has a reasonable chance of succeeding in its claims against the complaint. Further, that an order for the complainant’s withdrawal benefits to be paid to him would be prejudicial to its interests.

[5]    Determination and reasons therefor

Introduction

The issue which falls for determination is whether the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits by the funds is in line with the provisions of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.

The rules of the funds and the complainant’s benefits entitlement

Rule 16.1.4 of the funds provides for the withholding of withdrawal benefits and provide as follows:

 “16.1.4 At the request of an Employer, the Board will have the right to withhold payment of benefits in terms of the Rules if the termination of a Member’s Service with the Employer is, in the opinion of the Board and the Employer, due to theft, fraud or dishonesty and where the Employer has instituted legal proceedings in a court of law and/or laid a criminal charge against the Member concerned for compensation in respect of damage caused to the Employer as contemplated in section 37D of the Act, provided that:

 16.1.4.1 the Board is satisfied that the Employer has made out a prima facie case against the Member concerned; and

 16.1.4.2 the Board is satisfied that the Employer is not at any stage of the proceedings responsible for any undue delay in the prosecution of the proceedings; and

 16.1.4.3 the amount withheld may not exceed the value of the Employer’s claim against the Member; and

 16.1.4.4 the amount withheld must be invested in the Default Portfolio or such other Investment Portfolio as agreed by the Board from time to time; and

 16.1.4.5 once the proceedings have been determined, settled or formally withdrawn, any benefit to which the Member is entitled, is paid forthwith.”

As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Act. The relevant section of the Act in this complaint is section 37D(1)(b)(ii).
On a plain reading of the provision, section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act does not authorise the withholding of a member’s benefit where he is potentially liable for theft, fraud or misconduct against the employer. However, the Supreme Court of Appeal (“SCA”) in the Highveld matter held at paragraph 19 that:

“Such an interpretation would render the protection afforded to the employer by section 37D(1)(b) meaningless, a result which plainly cannot have been intended by the Legislature. It seems to me that to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording must be interpreted purposively to include the power to withhold payment of a member’s pension benefits pending the determination or acknowledgement of such member’s liability. The Funds therefore had the discretion to withhold payment of the Respondent’s pension benefit in the circumstances.”

In Appana J v Kelvinator Group Services of SA Provident Fund PFA/GA/475/99/LS (“Appana”) at page 129 D-G [also reported at [2000] 2 BPLR 126 (PFA) – Ed], the Adjudicator held:

“The purposive approach requires the interpreter to attach a meaning to the words which will promote the aim of the provision. Or to put it differently the purpose of the legislation must be determined and then given effect to.

The purpose of rule 8.2.1.4 and section 37D(b), as stated, is to protect the employer’s patrimony from diminution by member misconduct and to allow an appropriate set-off against the pension benefits. Thus in order to give effect to the purpose of rule 8.2.1.4, we must extend the textual meaning of the words to include not only a power to deduct but also the power to withhold a benefit pending the determination of liability.

An interpretation of rule 8.2.1.4 along these lines is essentially an application of the ex accessorio eius, de quo verba loquuntur maxim applied by our courts usually in respect of enabling legislation. The maxim provides that if a statutory provision confers a power, it also by implication confers those powers reasonably necessary to achieve the principal aim.”

It is accordingly permissible for the board of a fund to withhold a benefit in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.
As stated by the SCA in Highveld, the process of balancing the competing interests can be achieved by assessing the potential harm that will be suffered by the employee if the remedy (provided in section 37D(1)(b)(ii)) is granted as compared with, or balanced against, the potential harm to the employer if the remedy is not granted (see Shoba v Officer Commanding, Temporary Police Camp, Wagendrift Dam, and Another; Maphanga v Officer Commanding, South African Police Murder and Robbery Unit, Pietermaritzburg, and Others [1995] 2 All SA 300 (A) which dealt with the issue of granting an Anton Piller order and cited with approval in Non-Detonating Solutions (Pty) Ltd v Durie and another [2015] 4 All SA 630 (SCA) at paragraph [20]).
In Appana at 130 D-F, the Adjudicator held as follows:

“In withholding a benefit for legitimate reasons on behalf of a withdrawing member, the fund should afford the member some protection from suffering a decline in the value of the benefit during the period it is withheld. This can be achieved by giving the member the right to divest the benefit at an agreed rate of interest or to hedge the investment performance in some other way. In addition, the fund should only be permitted to withhold an amount up to the value of the employer’s claim. Furthermore, the employer should not be allowed to withhold the benefit indefinitely. Should the Complainant’s liability not be determined within a reasonable period, she shall be entitled to seek further relief from the Adjudicator…”

The period of withholding must be reasonable. However, what constitutes a reasonable period will differ depending on the circumstances of each case (see Buthelezi v Municipal Gratuity Fund and Another [2001] 5 BPLR 1996 (PFA). Any delay in the proceedings against the complainant to claim compensation for damages allegedly suffered by the employer (by reason of any theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct by the member) must not be due to the fault of the employer or the fund (See Sayed-Essop v Non-Ferrous Metal Works Pension Fund and Another [2000] 9 BPLR 1051 (PFA) at paragraph [14]).
In the judgement of SA Metal Group (Pty) Ltd v Deon Jeftha and 2 Others Case [2020] 1 BPLR 20 (WCC) (“SA Metal Group”), Steyn J stated at paragraph 62 that:

“…one can safely assume that the employer’s case, as related to the fund, must be put to the employee to afford him an opportunity to respond thereto before the fund should assume the liberty to take a decision impacting on the rights of the employee…The question remains whether the fund applied their mind appropriately, impartially and in a balanced manner.”

The High Court in SA Metal Group further held that:

 “5.12.1 The mere satisfaction by the trustees of a fund that the employer has placed allegations before them which, if true, would show damages arising from dishonest conduct by the employee, would not on its own be sufficient to meet the test set out by the SCA in Highveld Steel.

 5.12.2 The withholding of an employee’s benefit is analogous to that of an anti-dissipation order, which requires a well-grounded apprehension of irreparable harm or loss and because of its Draconian nature, invasiveness, and conceivably inequitable consequences, the courts have been reluctant to grant it except in the clearest of cases (citing DS v DS and Others (43425/11) [2012] ZAGPJHC 227, at para 17 – 18).”

 5.12.3 In order for the employer to succeed in having any amounts deducted from the pension funds of an employee, it must first and foremost establish that the member has committed theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct. The latter must have an element of dishonesty (see also Meyer v Provincial Department of Health and Welfare and Others (9092/05) [2006] ZAGPHC (27 January 2006) at paragraph [42]).”

 5.12.4 The employer’s recourse against a pension fund is only available in limited rare cases where the causa for the claim is an element of discreditable, untrustworthy conduct by the employee to his employer. Section 37D(1)(b)(ii) is exclusively reserved for employers who show that they are victims of specific dishonourable workplace transgressions. If not shown, the employer would not be entitled to the special protection envisaged (see also Boshoff v Iliad Africa Trading (Pty) Ltd t/a Builders Market Welkom [2012] JOL 29400 (FB) at paragraph [24] to [25]).

 5.12.5 The duties placed on a board of fund in section 7C of the Act envisages scrutiny of claims made against benefits by employers, and a weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording the member an opportunity to place his case properly before the fund. The failure by the board to comply with its duties constitutes an inability by the board of the fund to comply with their legally prescribed fiduciary duties.”

Members of the board must be independent and be seen to be independent and must act in such a way that there should be no suspicion about their impartiality.

Analysis

The complainant is no longer employed with the employer and his withdrawal benefits from the funds are due for payment. The employer opened a criminal case, and issued summons, against the complainant for the loss that it alleges he caused it in the amount of approximately R6 000 000.00.
The employer requested the funds to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits for loss it incurred caused by the complainant’s conduct. The conduct that caused loss to the employer includes alleged collusion with service providers to inflate prices of products. The conduct complained of against the complainant fits into the conduct that would lead to liability and, if proved, warrant a reduction of the complainant’s withdrawal benefits in the funds as envisaged under section 37D(1)(b)(ii) and rule 16.1.4 of the fund.
The information before the Adjudicator is that the complainant resigned from employment on 1 December 2020 and submitted his withdrawal claim forms in respect of his withdrawal benefits in the funds. The funds confirmed in March 2021, to the complainant, that they are withholding the complainant’s withdrawal benefits as permitted in section 37D of the Act, this confirmation was made following an enquiry made to the funds by the complainant. The confirmation by the funds was made to the complainant prior to the funds requesting the complainant to make representations concerning the withholding of his withdrawal benefits.
The funds deprived themselves of considering the complainant’s representations by not allowing him to make such representations. Based on the information before the Adjudicator, the complainant was informed by the employer in December 2020 that his withdrawal benefits would be withheld. It is in March 2021 when he enquired that the funds confirmed that his withdrawal benefits were withheld. However, it is in July 2021, after the complainant had lodged his complaint with the Adjudicator that the funds requested him to make representations to it on the employer’s request for a withholding. The information before the Adjudicator indicates that the funds acted on the weight of submissions made to them by the employer only. The principle from the SA Metal Group is essentially that, on receiving a request from an employer to withhold a member’s benefits, the board must solicit representations from the member prior to withholding the member’s benefits. The actions of the boards to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefits prior to obtaining representations from the complainant fall short of what is required by the Act prior to withholding member benefits. Pursuant to this failure, the boards of the funds did not apply their minds appropriately, impartially and in a balanced manner. Without same, the funds were incapable of balancing the competing interests of the parties before arriving at a decision to withhold. As a result, the Adjudicator finds that the boards exercised their discretion improperly.
It was held in the recent matter of SA Metal Group (Pty) Ltd v Deon Jeftha and 2 Others Case No: 20298/2018 – unreported at paras 62- 63, that the question is whether the fund applied its mind appropriately, impartially and in a balanced manner in deciding to withhold a benefit. It was further held that mere satisfaction by the board that the employer has placed allegations before it which, if true would show damages arising from dishonest conduct by the employee, would not on its own be sufficient to meet the test set by the SCA in the Highveld Steel matter (supra at para 5.3). It was also held that where a benefit has accrued, as in this matter, the member enjoys full ownership of the pension benefit. Thus, any claim that would have the effect of depriving such a member of the use and enjoyment of this asset must be carefully scrutinised. This is done by weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording a member the opportunity to place his case properly before the fund. This is also to ensure that a fund does not abuse the system or merely rubber-stamp the employer’s request to withhold a member’s benefit without any investigation into the merits of the allegations or the financial prejudice a member may suffer.
In terms of the Highveld decision, the funds were required to:
balance the competing interests of the employer and the member; and
have due regard to the strength of the employer’s case.
The funds could not have done either of the aforesaid without hearing from the complainant about:
What prejudice will the member suffer if the benefit is withheld; and
What response did the member have to the employer’s case.
In the Jeftha decision, it was held that the duties placed on a board in terms of section 7C envisages careful scrutiny of claims made against benefits by employers, and a weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording the member an opportunity to place his case properly before the fund. The failure by the boards of the funds to comply with their duties constitute an inability by the boards to comply with their legally prescribed fiduciary duties. It is undisputed that the funds made a decision to withhold the complainant’s benefits without hearing from him. Therefore, the funds deprived themselves of considering the complainant’s response by not allowing him an opportunity to make representations to them.
In Jeftha it was held that the withholding of an employee’s benefit is analogous to that of an anti-dissipation order, which requires a well- grounded apprehension of irreparable harm or loss and because of its draconian nature, invasiveness, and conceivably inequitable consequences, the courts have been reluctant to grant it except in the clearest of cases (citing DS v DS and Others (43425/11) [2012] ZAGPJHC 227, at paragraphs 17 – 18).
The benefit accrued to the complainant when he exited the service of the employer. In terms of section 7C(2)(f) of the Act, the funds owed the complainant a fiduciary duty in respect of his accrued benefits. The funds failed in their duties by depriving the complainant of his right to receive his accrued benefits when they decided to withhold his benefits.
In this matter, the boards acted in breach of their fiduciary duties towards the complainant. They failed to comply with procedural requirements before deciding to withhold the complainant’s benefits.

[5]    Order

In the result, the order of the Adjudicator is as follows:
The funds are ordered to pay the complainant’s withdrawal benefit, inclusive of fund return earned on such benefits calculated from 2 January 2021 to date of payment, less any deductions allowed in terms of the Act, within two weeks of this determination; and
The funds are ordered to provide the complainant with a breakdown of the withdrawal benefits paid in terms paragraph 6.1.1 above, within one week of effecting such payment.


End of Document