



City of Tshwane v Electronic Media Network Ltd [2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA)
Judgments Online

Division: Johannesburg
Case No: 06 / 09
Hearing Date(s): 09 / 04 / 2009
Judgment Date(s): 23 / 04 / 2009
Bench: Prof H Viljoen, Mr B Makeketa, Dr L Venter, Prof G Olivier


Keywords


Media — Broadcasting Complaints Commission — Investigative reporting — Complaint

Mini Summary


In an investigative programme broadcast by the respondent, allegations of fraud and corruption were levelled against the complainant, a municipality. Consequently, the municipality lodged 25 complaints against the respondent. The gist of the complaint was that the programme portrayed the city in a bad light, was inaccurate and presented untruthful statements about the city and its officials.

Held that one of the clauses in the commission's code which was alleged to have been violated by the broadcast related to the duty of the broadcaster to present opposing views when dealing with controversial issues of public importance. The commission took cognisance of evidence adduced by the respondent that it had attempted to contact the executive mayor and the city manager, and had submitted 35 written questions to the mayor and the city manager. The only positive response they received was an e-mail on the evening before the broadcast, containing bare denials of the allegations. It was found that the respondent had made all reasonable efforts to present opposing points of view and that no violation of the relevant clause could be found.

In terms of clause 35 of the code, licensees are permitted to broadcast comment on and criticism of any actions or events of public importance. The broadcaster adduced copious evidence that it had simply and properly exercised its right in that regard. In response, the complainant could adduce no evidence to counteract the allegations.

The complaint was dismissed.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 3




[1]    On 5 October 2008 the well-known investigative programme Carte Blanche was broadcast with an insert alleging certain occurrences of nepotism, corruption and various other irregularities in the Metropolitan Municipality of Tshwane. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the Metropolitan Municipality lodged a complaint with the Broadcasting Complaints Commission of South Africa. The gist of the complaint is as follows:

"The programme made certain statements which put the city in a particularly bad light. The programme suggests that the city is involved in corruption, scams and irregular activities. The programme is inaccurate and has presented untruthful statements of and about the city and its officials."

The complainant averred that the broadcaster had violated the Broadcasting Code of the BCCSA. Initially the producers of Carte Blanche were cited as second respondents in this matter, but only broadcasters, signatories to the Code of Conduct, can be cited in terms of our Rules. Thus, the only respondent before this Tribunal is Electronic Media Network Limited.

[2]    In its complaint, the Municipality listed some 25 detailed complaints, and in the complaints document of 35 pages gave the complainant's version in response to each of the broadcaster's allegations. Some of the allegations were merely denied. These detailed complaints will be dealt with below. The broadcaster, in turn, lodged a document of 32 pages, entitled "First and second respondents' response to City of Tshwane complaint". It is necessary, in my opinion, to thoroughly scrutinise this document.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 4

[3]    The attorney for the respondent (the broadcaster and the programme producer) starts off with a discussion of the clauses of the Broadcasting Code that may possibly have been violated and comes to the conclusion that these might be clauses 35 and 36. He then gives an exposition of the law relating to freedom of expression and the media, quoting some 18 court cases and BCCSA judgments. Thereafter, he deals with each and every complaint and the complainant's version of the particular occurrence. The attorney does this in a thorough and painstaking manner, with reference to evidence contained in some 34 documents attached as annexures, one being a 111-page forensic report by Deloitte on the Tshwane Metropolitan Police Department (annexure "H"). The documentary evidence covers almost 400 pages.

[4]    After this response by the broadcaster's representative, the complainant lodged a further document entitled "Complainant's reply to Respondent's answer". This document contains a great deal of repetition of the statements made in the complaints document, and does not materially contribute to the consideration of the complaint.

[5]    Five days after the broadcast, the executive mayor of the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality released a 12-page document entitled "Comprehensive response to the allegations contained in the Carte Blanche programme, broadcast on 5 October 2008". From this response it appears that the mayor regarded the broadcast as an attempt by the opposition parties, the DA in particular, to discredit the ANC. In the response, the mayor deals with some, but not all, of the allegations contained in the broadcast, as well as some issues not mentioned in the broadcast, such as the change of street names. As counsel for the complainant dealt with all the allegations contained in the broadcast, we do not find it necessary to deal with the mayor's response. We did not hear argument on this point, but the Tribunal is of the view that we cannot consider the mayor's press statement because it was made after the broadcast, and it was not addressed to the BCCSA. We have also been informed that the mayor, in a statement to her own council, said that the Metropolitan Municipality had obtained a court interdict against Carte Blanche to stop them from airing further allegations about the Municipality. 

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 5

According to the respondent, this is untrue. We do not regard it as necessary for this Tribunal to decide the veracity of these statements.

[6]    A hearing of this complaint, lasting about 4½ hours, took place on 9 April 2009. At the start of the hearing, the Tribunal and the parties viewed the insert complained of. The insert began with a retrospective view of some disclosures by Carte Blanche during October 2003 and August 2004 of negligence, incompetence, corruption, fraud and nepotism in the Tshwane Municipality. The insert then continued with certain follow-ups on these disclosures, while the rest of the programme contained new disclosures.

[7]    At the start of the hearing, counsel for the complainant was asked to state which clause or clauses the complainant based its cases for contravention of the Code upon, since this was not mentioned in any of the documents lodged by the complainant. Counsel confirmed that he based his case on clauses 35 and 36 of the Code as suggested by the attorney for the respondent. These clauses read, respectively:

Comment
Licensees shall be entitled to broadcast comment on and criticism of any actions or events of public importance.
Comment shall be an honest expression of opinion and shall be presented in such manner that it appears clearly to be comment, and shall be made on facts truly stated or fairly indicated and referred to.
Controversial issues of public importance
In presenting a programme in which controversial issues of public importance are discussed, a licensee shall make reasonable efforts to fairly present opposing points of view either in the same programme or in a subsequent programme forming part of the same series of programmes presented within a reasonable period of time of the original broadcast and within substantially the same time slot.
A person whose views are to be criticised in a broadcasting programme on a controversial issue of public importance shall be given a right to reply to such  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 6
criticism on the same programme. If this is impracticable however, opportunity for response to the programme should be provided where appropriate, for example in a right to reply programme or in a pre-arranged discussion programme with the prior consent of the person concerned."

Was the broadcast in contravention of clause 36 of the Code?

[8]    In dealing with these clauses, we think it is appropriate to start with clause 36. From documentary evidence submitted by the respondent, it is clear that on 11 September 2008 the managing editor of Carte Blanche endeavoured to comply with clause 36 by writing to the complainant, announcing Carte Blanche's intention to do a story on "the appointment of Commissioner Mpo Mmutle and others and the financial practices of the Metro". The letter also contained a request for an interview with the mayor, Dr Gwen Ramokgopa, and the city manager, Mr Kiba Kekana. The letter gave 7 days' notice of the interview and announced that the interview would be on camera with Devi Sankaree Govender.

[9]    The next day, on 12 September, the producer received an e-mail from one Jabu Dyantyi wherein he requested on behalf of Mr Console Tleane that the producer, Ms Susan Purén, send through questions in preparation for the interview. In the e-mail a promise was also made that the availability of the executive mayor and the city manager for the interview would be confirmed on the following Monday (ie 15 September). On Tuesday, 16 September the producer e-mailed 16 questions addressed to the mayor and 19 questions addressed to the municipal manager in preparation for the interviews. When nothing was forthcoming regarding the confirmation of the interviews, the producer e-mailed the municipality on 17 September and again on 22 September, pointing out that Carte Blanche had already wasted money in arranging for a camera crew for the interviews on the dates mentioned in the first letter. In apparent desperation, the producer also sent e-mails to the MEC for Local Government, Gauteng and to the National Treasury in the hope that they could prod the Municipality into action.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 7

[10]    On 23 September 2008, again after no further reaction to their request for the interviews was forthcoming, the managing editor of Carte Blanche once again wrote to the complainant, requesting the interviews but moving the date on to Thursday, 25 September. In the absence of an interview, the request was for a response in writing, to be broadcast during the programme. However, these further efforts came to naught.

[11]    At 6:02pm on Saturday, 4 October 2008, an e-mail was sent by Mr Console Tleane, Executive Head: Integrated Communication, Marketing & Information Services of the Municipality, to Ms Susan Purén – just a day before the intended broadcast. In the e-mail the following, inter alia, was stated:

"The City of Tshwane wishes to state that allegations and innuendo contained in the questions posed and that will apparently be broadcast on 05 October 2008 are inaccurate in almost all instances. Innuendo concerning the political and administrative leadership is not true and not borne by facts. Instead there are many misrepresentations that will be exposed at other platforms."

The only allegations dealt with in this e-mail concerned the use by Ms Lebogang Mahaye of municipal funds for a massage and one about the alleged intimate relationship between Ms Cecilia Moumakoe and the city manager, Mr Kiba Kekana. Both allegations were denied. It should be mentioned that at the end of the broadcast on 5 October 2008, the presenter, Mr Derek Watts, referred to the above-mentioned e-mail and gave a summary of its contents.

[12]    It may be concluded from all these events that the producers of this particular Carte Blanche programme went to great lengths to comply with the provisions of clause 36 of the Code. However, from 11 September to the date of the broadcast on 5 October 2008, there seems to have been no serious effort by the Metropolitan Municipality to engage with the producers of the Carte Blanche programme, except for the e-mail of 4 October which contained not much more than a general denial of the veracity of the allegations implicit in the questions sent to the Municipality.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 8

[13]    In his argument on the applicability of clause 36, and apparently in defence of the mayor and the city manager's not being prepared to appear on television, Mr Nalane, for the complainant, relied heavily on the fact that the broadcast dealt with more issues than those raised in the questions that were sent on 16 September. According to him, a fair process was not followed because the Municipality was not warned beforehand of all the issues that were to be exposed in the insert. He argued that the persons mentioned in the programme had a right to privacy and it was the duty of the Municipality to protect its employees.

[14]    Mr Milo, for the respondent, started off by objecting to the fact that the complainant argued a different case at the hearing to the one it presented in the papers before the Tribunal. In the light of the findings at the end of this judgment, and judged by the manner in which he argued his case, it did not appear that the representative for the respondent was in any way disadvantaged by this matter, and we do not intend to spend any time on his objection. In addition, Mr Milo referred to all the efforts, mentioned above, that the producers had made in attempting to comply with clause 36 of the Code, and he asked the question: 

"What more do you expect a broadcaster to do?" 

He mentioned that the producer of a programme such as the one under discussion is not obliged to submit questions to the interviewee beforehand, and even after having done so, is not bound by those questions. He argued that it is fair to expect that the political head and the most senior official of the Municipality might have some knowledge at least of matters that had previously been exposed by Carte Blanche, and of other matters that were already in the public domain, as will be referred to later.

[15]    We have come to the conclusion that the period of time allowed by the producer of the Carte Blanche programme – namely, from 11 September to 5 October 2008 – for the complainant to respond to the questions put by the producer or to engage in any manner with the producer, was reasonable. We do not think that the complainant's excuses that it is a large institution and that it was not granted enough time, are sufficient reason to find otherwise. We find that it was reasonable to expect of the  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 9
mayor and the city manager of a municipality that has committed itself to "the principles of good governance and being transparent, accountable and people centred (sic)"1 to face the media and accept responsibility for what later in this judgment appear to be substantiated cases of fraud, corruption, nepotism and other illegalities – all matters of serious public concern. This expectation is also endorsed by section 152(1)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 which provides that:

"The objects of local government are –

to provide democratic and accountable government for local communities."

For the complainant to argue that the broadcast covered more than was suggested by the questions sent to the mayor and the city manager, does not advance the complainant's argument. Up until the date of the broadcast, the complainant could not and did not know exactly what was to be disclosed by Carte Blanche. There was also no onus on the part of Carte Blanche to announce to the complainant the exact contents of the programme before such broadcast. That is part of editorial freedom. It seems unreasonable for the mayor and city manager to proffer their imaginings of what the producer might present to the viewers of the programme, as an excuse for withholding permission for the interview. By this we are not saying that the mayor and the city manager were obliged to grant interviews. It was their choice not to co-operate, but as the most senior representatives of the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, they ran the risk of the viewing public drawing negative conclusions regarding their failure to respond in public.

[16]    Had it appeared, after 11 September, that the mayor and the city manager might need more time to prepare for the requested interview, we think that they should have requested an extension of the deadline for the interview. Any refusal by the producer to accede to such a reasonable request would, depending on the circumstances, have strengthened the complainant's case based on clause 36. However, from the facts  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 10
before us, it appears that the mayor and the city manager deliberately, or at least negligently, failed to present themselves for an interview. If they could not or would not accede to this request, they should at least have made other arrangements for some other responsible official to face the respondent or have responded in writing to the questions sent to them on 16 September. In the event, the reasonable viewer of the programme is left with the uncomfortable impression that incompetence, fraud, corruption, nepotism and other illegalities are so rife in the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality that the mayor has no answer to the allegations, or, worse still, that she is not even aware of the issues raised. Taking all these factors into account, we have decided that the respondent had taken all reasonable steps to "fairly present opposing points of view" as required by clause 36 of the Code, and the complainant's case on this point is thus dismissed.

Was the broadcast in contravention of clause 35 of the Code?

[17]    Clause 35 of the Code requires of a broadcaster, when broadcasting comment on and criticism of any actions or events of public importance, to do so honestly and to do so on facts truly stated or fairly indicated and referred to. This relates to the principle of freedom of expression that is protected in section 16 of the Constitution of South Africa. The freedom of the press, expressly mentioned in section 16(i)(a), is one of the pillars of the democratic state. Without this freedom, there cannot be a democracy.2 Yet, as with other rights and freedoms enshrined in our Constitution, this freedom, cannot be unlimited. For this reason, section 36 of the Constitution provides for limitations to these rights and freedoms, on condition that such limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society. The Broadcasting Code of Conduct has, accordingly, been agreed upon by role players in the broadcast industry. In effect, this Code puts some limitation on the broadcasters, who are signatories to the Code. Clause 35 of the Code is such an example. The effect of this clause is that signatories to the Code do not have an unfettered right to broadcast anything and everything,  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 11
including comment on matters of public importance.

[18]    In applying the limitations to the fundamental right to freedom of expression as determined by clause 35, we are guided by the judgments of our courts. A good example of judicial interpretation of this freedom, as it relates to the printed media, is to be found in the case of Mthembi-Mahanyele v Mail & Guardian.3 In this decision by our Supreme Court of Appeal, we read the following which is particularly relevant to this case:4

"Freedom of expression in political discourse is necessary to hold members of government accountable to the public. And some latitude must be allowed in order to allow robust and frank comment in the interest of keeping members of society informed about what government does. Errors of fact should be tolerated, provided that statements are published justifiably and reasonably: that is with the reasonable belief that the statements made are true. Accountability is of the essence of a democratic state: It is one of the founding values expressed in section 1(d) of our Constitution."

And in the following paragraph of the judgment:

"The State, and its representatives, by virtue of the duties imposed upon them by the Constitution, are accountable to the public. The public has the right to know what the officials of the State do in discharge of their duties. And the public is entitled to call on such officials, or members of government, to explain their conduct. When they fail to do so, without justification, they must bear the criticism and comment that their conduct attracts, provided of course that it is warranted in the circumstances and not actuated by malice."

It is clear from these passages that the "messengers" (the media) have a duty to inform the public what the politicians and the bureaucrats are doing in the discharge of their functions and duties. They (the politicians and the bureaucrats) are, after all, in the service of the public and are expending their (the public's) tax money on the services that they are committed to provide. The "messengers", on the other hand, have the duty to publish and broadcast their statements "justifiably and reasonably", as stated by the Supreme Court of Appeal.

[19]    In the present case the respondent's response to the complaint, dated 18 December 2008, contained detailed answers to each of the complaints, gave a thorough exposition  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 12
of the legal principles applicable to this broadcast and, as stated in paragraph [3] above, attached almost 400 pages of evidence of the facts upon which the broadcaster based its comment. Despite this evidence of the facts on which the comment was based, the complainant chose to persist with this complaint to the BCCSA. At the hearing, counsel for the complainant, in reaction to a pertinent question by the chairman, maintained his original position, namely, that the allegations by the broadcaster were untruthful and that the insert was inaccurate. That left us no other choice but to ask the respondent to present proof that their comment on and criticism of the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality was undertaken in an honest manner and was based on facts truly stated or fairly indicated and referred to. We will now deal with each of the allegations complained of.

Chief of the Metro Police, Commissioner Mmutle clocks 181 km/h in peak traffic

[20]    In paragraph [6] above, reference is made to certain retrospective inserts on Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality broadcast by Carte Blanche in previous programmes. On 24 August 2004, comment was broadcast on the chief of the Metro Police of Tshwane, who was alleged to have driven at a speed of 181 km/h to his place of employment. The aim of this retrospective insert, according to the respondent, was to put the controversial reappointment of Mr Mmutle as chief of the Metro Police into context. Counsel for the complainant objected to this insert, stating that the complainant could not comment on the event for which documentary evidence, such as the relevant logbook, was not available. We allowed the insert because the allegation concerning Commissioner Mmutle exceeding the speed limit while driving his official vehicle was not the focus of the broadcast on 5 October 2008. The focus was his reappointment. We were also informed by the respondent's representative that after the insert of the police commissioner's speeding offence in August 2004, there was no complaint lodged by either the Commissioner or the Metropolitan Municipality. Counsel for the complainant did not object to the statement of this information, and we accept it as being true. Furthermore, as this information had been in the public domain for a long time, in the sense that it had been reported on in the media, we dismiss the complaint. 

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 13

The other allegations about Commissioner Mmutle were dealt with in the papers before the Tribunal and at the hearing at a later stage, but it is our opinion that it makes sense to deal with all the allegations against the Commissioner together, since they concern the same person.

Purchase of three Volvos for high speed patrols but which were used for something else

[21]    Before dealing with this allegation, we must make mention of the so-called Deloitte report. The forensic auditing arm of the firm Deloitte was engaged by the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality to investigate various matters regarding the Metropolitan Police Department. This resulted in a report by Deloitte, dated 26 May 2004, which was attached to the respondent's document entitled "First and second respondent's response to City of Tshwane complaint" as annexure H. The respondent has relied on this document for many of the allegations contained in the insert. This allegation about the three Volvo motor cars was also part of the retrospective inserts mentioned above in paragraph [6]. As with the allegation about the speeding commissioner, the focus was not on the Volvo cars but on the controversial reappointment of Commissioner Mmutle. The purpose of the insert was to comment on the fact that Commissioner Mmutle allowed the unauthorised use of the vehicles by his three deputies during his first term of office and, despite this, was reappointed for a second term. The Deloitte report confirmed the unauthorised use of the vehicles, and the respondent had reliable factual information upon which they based their insert. Consequently, the complaint regarding this insert is dismissed.

Awarding of a multi-million rand tender for guns to a questionable company

[22]    This allegation, like the previous two, was also part of the retrospective inserts mentioned in paragraph [6]. The purpose of this was also to paint a picture of Commissioner Mmutle's past and to put his reappointment into context. The allegation, as broadcast by Carte Blanche in August 2003, was that Commissioner Mmutle and his  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 14
team awarded a multi-million rand tender for guns to a questionable company. In its investigation of this matter, Carte Blanche found that the company existed on paper only, and this fact was included in the insert. The Metropolitan Municipality never complained about the broadcast of August 2003. The complainant admitted that it investigated the matter and that, as a result, the owner of the company in question was arrested and the tender cancelled. By making this admission, the complainant in fact confirmed the truth of the respondent's allegations. On these grounds this complaint is dismissed.

The legal requirements for Chief Mmutle and his deputies

[23]    This insert has to be judged on the same basis as the previous ones, namely, to put the reappointment of Commissioner Mmutle in perspective. This insert was also broadcast in August 2003, and the matter was later reported on by Deloitte. This matter relates to the appointment of a certain KSB Sekhudu as Deputy Chief Commissioner of the Tshwane Metropolitan Police, as well as Commissioner Mmutle's role in his appointment. The insert reveals that when Mr Sekhudu applied for this post, he created the impression that he had previously been employed by the South African Police Service by stating the following in his curriculum vitae (annexure I):

"SAPS vehicle unit

– I joint (sic) vehicle theft unit task team of SAPS.
Tracing of stolen vehicles."

It later transpired that he was not previously employed by the SAPS. The report by Deloitte, who investigated the matter after the first insert, stated that the quoted part of the Deputy Commissioner's CV created the impression that he was a member of the SAPS. As to the role of Commissioner Mmutle in the appointment of the Deputy Commissioner, it was stated in the insert that Mr Sekhudu is a "close personal relative of commissioner Mmutle". This matter was also investigated by Deloittes (see annexure H) and they reported the following: 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 15
"Mr Mmutle informed us that Mr Sekhudu is married to a cousin of his. Mr Mmutle admits that he never declared this interest. Mr Mmutle was part of the selection and interview process and did not excuse himself from the interview process."

These facts are in stark contrast with the complainant's statement in paragraph 11.3 of its complaint document as follows:

"Commissioner Mmutle was not at all involved in the appointment of Deputy Chief Sekhudu."

What is even more astonishing is that Mr Sekhudu in his CV gave the name of Commissioner Mmutle as one of his references. Although the respondent did not allege that the appointment of the Deputy Commissioner was irregular, such a notion may have been impressed on the minds of reasonable viewers. This, however, would not have been in contravention of clause 35, since the report by Deloitte confirmed that the Chief and his Deputy were related, and that the Chief was involved in the selection process and in the interview with Mr Sekhudu. The latter undoubtedly demonstrates that an irregularity took place. We find that the respondent was justified in disclosing this information, and consequently this complaint is also dismissed.

The report that was compiled in respect of Commissioner Mmutle was never made public

[24]    We have to agree with the respondent that it is not clear what the complaint is regarding this part of the insert. The complainant in its response to the broadcast states that there is no requirement that the report should have been published and by implication admits that the report was not made public. The exact wording of the broadcast that gave rise to this particular complaint is:

"The events that followed were compiled in a report that has never been made public." 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 16
A separate complaint was lodged regarding the "events that followed". We are only dealing here with the complaint regarding the words broadcast as quoted above. In this complaint, the complainant refers to the: 

". . . wild and unfounded allegations when the matter involving the charges against Commissioner Mmutle has been made public through media statements . . ." 

These so-called wild and unfounded statements relate to another matter in respect of which the complainant lodged a separate complaint. Counsel for the complainant was not forthcoming with an explanation as to what the complaint was actually about. Our view is that this is not a valid complaint.

Six charges levelled against Commissioner Mmutle but he struck a deal with his comrades, resigned and the charges withdrawn

[25]    In the complaint document, the only response by the complainant to this allegation is that the charges were unconditionally withdrawn. However, on closer inspection of the documentary evidence, quite another picture emerges. In the city manager's report to the mayoral committee (annexure J – the so-called Blake report) the following is stated with regard to the disciplinary action taken against Commissioner Mmutle:

"During this first hearing all charges against the Commissioner were withdrawn following a meeting convened amongst the Executive Mayor, The Speaker, The Chief Whip and the Commissioner. The purpose of the meeting was to expressly to (sic) reach a settlement that would accommodate all the interests of those concerned with as little further unsatisfactory publicity as possible."

The report continued to state that it was agreed at that meeting between the parties that the charges would be withdrawn and that Commissioner Mmutle would resign to take up a new post in the SAPS. The respondent even included in the documentation a letter by the national commissioner of the SAPS, Commissioner Selebi, wherein Commissioner Mmutle had been recalled to the SAPS (annexure M). It is therefore clear that there was not merely an unconditional withdrawal of the six charges against Mmutle, but that there was an agreement that the charges would be withdrawn if the Commissioner resigned. The respondent was justified in making such allegations  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 17
because they based these on documentary evidence that originated from the complainant. This complaint must therefore also be dismissed.

The other Tshwane Metro Police officers

[26]    In the insert the following was stated: 

"The other Tshwane Metro Police Officers who were charged also walked free on technical grounds." 

The complainant's response to this allegation was that the allegations against the officers were probed by independent parties, that they were found not to be proven and that the officers were cleared. The respondent once again submitted written evidence upon which Carte Blanche's allegation was based. In the Blake report (annexure L) it is stated that all the charges against the three officers were dismissed on the basis that there were inconsistencies in the application of the rules and/or policies, apparent non-compliance with the enabling statute, and confusion as to which policies were applicable. We agree with the respondent that, taking all the evidence into consideration, it is clear that no finding on the merits of the charges was made. We find that the insert constituted honest comment on a matter of public concern and the complaint is thus dismissed.

Council got rid of Commissioner Mmutle's successor and advertised the position

[27]    The complainant's response to this allegation is that the Metro Police and Emergency Services departments were organised into a new Community Safety department, that all employees in these departments had to re-apply for their jobs and that Commissioner Mmutle's successor, Mr Hlula Msimang, declined to apply for the new post. They state further that the Municipality and Mr Msimang amicably settled this matter. The respondent justifies the allegation by stating that the information was in the public domain, and they then refer to annexures N and O. This is a web page printout of a report by City Press entitled "Metro cop mayhem" dated 2 February 2008. In the report, various names of officials in the Police Department are mentioned, including Mmutle, Sekhudu, Coetzer, Mokhine and Baloyi, and the problems they are having with or are causing to their employer are also mentioned. The only reference to  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 18
Msimang is a statement that he is seeking legal advice because his post has been scrapped. The report ends by stating that Msimang would continue to serve the city until such time that either of the parties decide to terminate the relationship. We have a problem with the interpretation of the words used by the respondent in the insert, namely, "Council simply got rid of Commissioner Mmutle's successor". Here, the impression likely to be created in the mind of the reasonable viewer, is, to our mind, that Mr Msimang was unfairly dismissed. This is contrary to a situation where the employer reorganises or restructures its municipality, or part thereof, and then settles a dispute resulting from this restructuring. The outcome in both cases is the same, namely, the termination of an employment contract, but the impression created in a broadcast of this nature is totally different. "To get rid of" smacks of arbitrariness of action by the employer, leaving the employee out in the cold, whilst a settlement after a retrenchment leaves one with a feeling that justice has been done. Had the respondent relied on this document alone, we would have found a contravention of clause 36. However, the respondent also relies on annexure O, which is a webpage printout of a report by (sic). In this report the following is stated: 

"Hlula Msimang replaced Mmutle, but Msimang's contract had now been terminated out of the blue and Mmutle would again succeed him." 

Further on, it is stated that: 

"[T]he ANC's irrational step would cost the metro council millions." 

This creates the impression of an unfair dismissal, and the respondent was justified in presenting the comment in the manner it did. We wish to state that this complaint, of the 25 lodged by the complainant, caused the most doubt in our minds. On a balance of probabilities, however, we find that there was no contravention of the Code, and the complaint is dismissed.

Commissioner Mmutle was appointed to the re-advertised position

[28]    In this instance the wording of the insert was: 

"Guess who got it (the re-advertised post)? Commissioner Mmutle of course." 

The complaint reads that the allegation is made that Commissioner Mmutle was improperly reappointed. The word "improperly" is not used in the insert. In effect, the insert comments on a fact that is common cause. What the respondent does admit, though, is that Commissioner Mmutle should not have been reappointed to his post, given his poor track record and the allegations of  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 19
corruption that had previously been levelled against him. Given the controversy surrounding Commissioner Mmutle, which was in the public domain at that stage, we agree with the respondent that the insert amounted to fair comment on a matter of public importance, and that it was based on facts truly stated. It follows that there was no contravention in this regard, and the complaint is dismissed.

Appointment of Commissioner Mmutle's secretary

[29]    On the insert, pertaining to this complaint, it was stated that Commissioner Mmutle brought with him from Atteridgeville Police Station his secretary, Alice Lebelo, to be his executive secretary at the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality. It was alleged that Ms Lebelo does not even have a typing qualification, and that a post was fraudulently created for her. The complainant does not deny that she was appointed as executive secretary to Commissioner Mmutle, or that she does not have a typing qualification. As to the fraudulent scheme to have her appointed, the respondent displayed on the insert a copy of an e-mail dated 29 August 2008 from a certain Valerie Steyn, HR – Key Accounts Specialist of the Municipality. In our view, it is important to quote the whole e-mail (annexure Q). It is addressed to Mr Giep de Wet and reads as follows:

"Our telephone conversation of just now refers.

I have just spoken to Phillip Ratsiane on above matter. As we believe a verbal agreement was reached between your Commissioner and our Mr Tumagole (acting ED: HR Strategic), this arrangement was not officially recorded (although Mr Phala from my office confirmed the arrangement afterwards in a mail.

Phillip agreed that, based on above agreement reached, Alice Lebelo could start to work as early as Monday (1 Sept 08), but he suggested that we rather follow a 'process' of appointing her. We could potentially create problems and grievances unless we go this route.

Please note that we will try and streamline suggested process as effectively as possible. To protect all relevant parties, as well as our HR-processes, Corp HR will advertised (sic) the post of Exec Secretary on Monday at the One Stop Service for a short period and we will have interviews hopefully next week or the week after that.

I checked with Philip and the arrangement is that a cash focus will be arranged for Alice, should the process not be finalised by the end of the month/before SAP closes. This is to ensure that she would he (sic) paid although we are still in process of finalising the appointment.

Your office is thus welcome to liaise with Alice regarding WHEN you like her to start. It is suggested that your Office also liaise with Lerato to make the necessary  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 20
arrangements wrt her acting in the current post."

This e-mail is clear evidence that there was an agreement between the officials to have the Commissioner's choice of secretary appointed and to then fraudulently advertise the post despite the fact that a decision to fill the post had already been taken. To compound the fraud, it is stated in the complaint document, dated 1 November 2008, in paragraph 18.3, that: 

"(T)he position was advertised and the process of filling it has not yet been concluded." 

With all this damning evidence at their disposal, we are convinced that the respondent was truthful with its comments on the appointment of the Commissioner's secretary. No contravention of the Code could be found and the complaint is dismissed.

Kiba Kekana, the city's municipal manager, re-appointed Commissioner Mmutle against the will of Dr Gwen Ramokgopa

[30]    The only response by the complainant to this allegation is that it is not true because Commissioner Mmutle's appointment followed a proper process which was open and transparent. The respondent based the allegation on the fact that this information was in the public domain at the time when the insert was broadcast. For this purpose they relied on the news website of the Freedom Front Plus, dated 29 July 2008 (annexure S). They also state that they further based their allegation on information supplied by highly-placed sources employed by the Municipality whose identities are confidential. The respondent refers to a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights5 for its reliance on confidential information. It may be lawful for the media to use this method of gathering information, as this judgment confirms, but the problem for the decision-maker, in the present case this Tribunal, is that we have no objective norm by which we can judge the reasonable veracity of such information. However, it is clear that the reappointment of Commissioner Mmutle was a controversial matter of public importance. It is also clear from annexure S that the resignation of President Mbeki and the divisions within the ruling party also had its effect on municipal politics. We find that, with the information at their disposal, it was fair for the respondent to comment in this  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 21
way on the reappointment of Commissioner Mmutle. This complaint is dismissed. This concludes the allegations regarding Commissioner Mmutle and the relevant complaints that followed the broadcast.

1998 Pass rate for a group of 128 new recruits

[31]    This complaint also concerns one of the issues that was part of the retrospective inserts and was broadcast with the object of putting the comments on Commissioner Mmutle in perspective. This concerned a claim by the Metropolitan Police Department that new recruits in the traffic department obtained a pass rate of 98%. The respondent alleged in the insert that marks were artificially increased so as to manipulate the pass rate. The complainant incorrectly made reference to the 1998 figures, as a check on the insert reveals that no date was mentioned in the broadcast. In the complainant's response it is stated that the head of vocational training was charged before a disciplinary hearing, but found not guilty, and therefore there was no wrongdoing. The respondent based its allegation on the Deloitte report (annexure H) where it is stated that the head of vocational training admitted to the investigators that he had given instructions for the marks to be increased. He was charged for directly altering the marks whilst he in fact gave the instruction for the marks to be altered. He was apparently found not guilty on this technical point. We find that the respondent had sufficient objective evidence on which they based their allegations and the complaint is dismissed.

Council spent hundreds of thousands of rand probing the allegations Carte Blanche made

[32]    This statement, made during the insert, seems to be reasonable in light of the Blake report and the Deloitte report referred to above (annexures K and H respectively). The Deloitte report must have cost the Municipality a lot of money. Common knowledge and common sense suggest that such a comprehensive investigation by forensic auditors does not come cheaply. We find that such comment was fair. The Blake report  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 22
expressly refers to the disciplinary action against Commissioner Mmutle and the six charges that he had to face. Of especial concern to us is the complainant's response in paragraph 12.2, where the following is stated: 

"It is denied that Deloitte ever confirmed the allegations that were made. The full council, flowing from the Deloitte report, did not find anything against the commissioner." 

I refer to paragraphs [21], [23] and [31] above, where reference is made to the Deloitte findings. These are three examples where the Deloitte report confirmed the allegations by the respondent in the previous broadcast. The complainant was aware, or should have been aware, of the Deloitte findings in this regard. Further to the second sentence quoted above, one might ask: If the Council did not find anything against the Commissioner, why was he charged in a disciplinary hearing? The complainant should also qualify its statement that it did not find anything against him since there was an agreement that he would resign if the charges were withdrawn. The merits of the charges against him were thus not decided. One gets the uneasy feeling that the response by the complainant was not made in good faith, or that this was an attempt to mislead the Tribunal. However, we do not make a finding in this regard. The complaint is, nevertheless, dismissed.

Dr Ramokgopa apparently appointed her friend as her spokesperson

[33]    This allegation, as well as the response to it, is quite unsatisfactory. Apart from submitting that this allegation was already in the public domain, and naming the spokesperson, the respondent gives no proof upon which they base their allegation. In its response, the complainant merely states that the allegation is incorrect. It is not clear whether they mean that the spokesperson was not appointed by Dr Ramokgopa or whether she was not appointed as spokesperson or whether she was not a friend of the mayor. No evidence, documentary or otherwise, was submitted by the complainant to substantiate the denial of the correctness of the allegation. The only saving element for the respondents is that the word "apparently" was used in the insert. That makes the allegation sufficiently vague, so that not much value can be attached to it. In this instance the complaint is also dismissed.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 23

Appointment of Cecilia Moumakoe as executive head in the private office of the municipal manager

[34]    The allegation in the insert is that Cecilia Moumakoe, whose only qualification is a diploma in travel and tourism, and who has very little experience, was appointed as executive secretary to the municipal manager, Mr Kiba Kekana, at a salary of "around R800 000". A further allegation is made that she is romantically involved with Mr Kekana. Annexure T, attached to the respondent' response dated 18 December 2008, contains the curriculum vitae (CV) of Ms Moumakoe. The allegations about her qualifications and experience are substantiated by this document. From this document, it also appears that she had given the name of Mr Kekana as a reference. His e-mail address on this document is given as ljoel@salga.gov.za. From this it appears that, as at the date of her CV, Mr Kekana and she were both employed at the South African Local Government Association. From this it does not necessarily follow that they are romantically involved. The respondent again relies on confidential information for this allegation, which makes it again difficult for us to judge the veracity of this information. The saving element for the respondent is that the complainant came forward at number 99 with a bare denial of this allegation, and this was broadcast with the insert. As to the alleged salary of R800 000: if the information at the disposal of the respondent was that that was the salary of the previous incumbent of the post, it would not be unreasonable of the respondent to assume that the salary of the present incumbent would be "around" the same. We cannot find any contravention of the Code in this instance and the complaint is dismissed.

Marketing Tshwane as a destination of choice

[35]    Several allegations gave rise to this complaint and we deal with them in the order in which they appear in the papers. The first part of the complaint is that the allegation is made that Kennedy Khabo received a contract from the Metropolitan Municipality to present "South Africa Week" in the United States of America "by virtue of his friendship with the city manager". As pointed out by the respondent, that was not  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 24
stated in the insert. The wording in the insert is: "Khabo . . . is an old friend of Kiba Kekana." One might infer, however, from this insinuation that the contract flowed from the fact that they were friends. The respondent does admit that Kekana was appointed to the post of city manager after the contract had been awarded, but avers that Kekana was a mayoral advisor at the time (for the awarding of the contract) and "South Africa Week" was originally a mayoral committee project. This was not denied by the complainant. The second part of this complaint has to do with the fact that it is alleged on the insert that Khabo is not VAT registered. The complainant states that Khabo, being a registered vendor, had submitted a tax clearance certificate. However, the documentary evidence submitted by the respondent (annexure U) denies the validity of this assertion. As to the specific amounts mentioned in the insert that the complainant spent on dinners and for a business forum, exhibition space, etcetera, no documentary evidence is supplied by the respondent. On the other hand, the bare denial of the truth of these allegations is not helpful. There also seems to be confusion regarding the date of "South Africa Week". In the insert, the words "SA Week 2007" appeared in the top left-hand corner of the screen. The complainant, in its response to the allegation, states that the broadcast is misleading because it is not related to the 2008 South Africa Week. We do not think it is necessary to determine what the year of the South Africa Week was in order to decide whether there was a violation of the Code. Considered in context, and on a balance of probabilities, we are not convinced that the respondent violated the Code in this instance, and the complaint is dismissed.

Use of exclusive venues

[36]    The allegation was that the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality sometimes spent as much as R300 000 on exclusive venues at places as far away as Hazyview, while the Municipality has its own upmarket conference centre that could be utilised for a fraction of the price. This allegation is substantiated by documentary evidence (annexure V). A further allegation under this complaint is that a certain Ms Lebogang Mahaye had a full body massage at such a breakaway, costing R1 300, for which the Municipality – in effect the ratepayers – were billed. The only response by the complainant to these allegations is that Ms Mahaye paid for the massage out of her  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 25
own pocket. No proof of this has been forthcoming. The denial by Ms Mahaye reached the respondent at number 99, and it was included in the insert. There was, furthermore, no denial by the complainant that the amounts mentioned by the respondent were spent by the Municipality on its "legotlas". No contravention of the Code could be found and the complaint is dismissed.

Proper internal financial control

[37]    The allegation was, inter alia, that there was no proper financial control at the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, that the Auditor-General has given the Municipality qualified audits for the past eight years, and that the AG's report contained 23 pages of discrepancies. The AG's report is attached as annexure W. In its response, the complainant merely made the bland statement that the city's finances are under control, and then seems to try to justify this statement by referring, without any further proof, to the fact that the city's long- and short-term ratings have been confirmed by Global Credit Ratings. The complainant does not give any explanation for the qualified reports and the 23 pages of discrepancies. In light of the evidence, we have to agree with the respondent that the complainant's response is absurd. The complaint is dismissed.

Number of bodyguards for the executive mayor

[38]    In the context of the discrepancies highlighted in the AG's report, the allegation was made in the insert that the number of bodyguards used by the executive mayor was incorrectly stated. The response by the complainant was that the matter of the mayor's bodyguards is a security matter that cannot be openly discussed. As this matter is mentioned in the AG's report (annexure W, paragraph 13.12) and the complainant could not explain or deny this allegation, no contravention could be established and the complaint must be dismissed.

Head of procurement Hamilton Mhlom

[39]    The allegation is that the head of procurement got the Municipality to pay a further R8 million  
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 26
for computer equipment from another supplier, that there was an investigation, that he is back at work, and that there was no explanation (presumably of what became of the investigation). The complainant confirms that there was a forensic investigation into an IT equipment tender, that disciplinary charges were laid against Mr Mhlom and another official, and that Mr Mhlom was found guilty on a minor charge. It appears that the allegation in the insert was substantially true and that the respondent's version is not denied by the complainant. This complaint is also dismissed.

Qualifications of finance department personnel

[40]    The allegation is that the chief financial officer of the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality, who is in charge of an annual budget of R15 billion, is not a qualified chartered accountant, that she earns an annual salary of over R1 million, and that before her appointment to the position in 2006, an industrial psychologist had warned that she would find it very difficult to comply with the demands of the position. In its response, the complainant states that all the incumbents of the senior positions meet with the required standards, and then goes on to set out the CFO's qualifications and experience. However, the complainant does not deny any of the allegations in the insert and the complaint is consequently dismissed.

Price Waterhouse Coopers

[41]    In the insert, the respondent made the statement that the Municipality appointed outside auditors, Price Waterhouse Coopers, to assist with current financial statements. The two tenders that were awarded to the same auditors were valued at R7,9 million and R800 000 respectively. The complainant does not deny this, but, in an apparent effort to justify this, states that the fees "are not at all unreasonable". The respondent had not stated that the fees were unreasonable. We find that there was no valid complaint in this instance.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 27

Six senior officials who have been out of work since 2003

[42]    An allegation was made that of the 34 managers who lost their jobs when the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality was formed, six are still collecting salaries and benefits, though only one comes in to work. This has cost the Municipality R22 million to date, and should they stay on until age 65, this amount will increase to R227 million. The response by the Municipality is that "only nine managers are currently suspended" and that no extraordinary amounts were paid out to employees for termination of employment contracts during the past three years. This is tantamount to saying that the respondent is correct but that the number of suspended managers is in fact in excess of that stated in the insert! The respondent did not make any allegation regarding amounts paid out to employees whose contracts were terminated, so we think that the reference to "extraordinary amounts" is irrelevant. The final response by the complainant in this regard requires some comment. It is stated that it is not the city's policy to disclose personal information about employees and former employees. We regard the fact that employees who have been suspended for five years are still receiving salaries not as a piece of personal information about the employees, but as vital information to which the public, especially the ratepayers of Tshwane, are entitled in a transparent and democratic society. As the veracity of the allegation is not challenged, we do not regard this as a valid complaint.

Adrianus Weyers

[43]    The allegation was made that three years ago Adrianus Weyers wrote to the Department of Labour and the Engineering Council of South Africa, voicing his concerns about electricians of the Municipality who scored low marks in skills tests. As a result of these electricians being employed, three people allegedly died because of electrical shocks. Weyers was suspended by his employer. He took the case to the High Court and won, but he has not been reinstated. The only response by the complainant is: 

"[I]t is the policy of the city not to comment publically (sic) on individual employee matters." 

The same objection may be levelled against the complainant as in the previous complaint. According to the article published on the Fin24 website (annexure Z2), 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 28
the Municipality suspended a whistleblower because he disclosed information to the effect that the safety of the public had been compromised through employment equity practices, and the Municipality then disobeyed a court order to reinstate the whistleblower. If this is true, and the complainant does not contradict the respondent, this is information which the public should have access to because their safety is at stake and their tax money is being used to pay for a case which should not have gone to court in the first place. As the complainant does not object to any part of this insert and does not indicate any grounds on which they base their case, this complaint is not regarded by the Tribunal as a valid one.

Pushing people out of the system – Tommy Harrington

[44]    This concerns a complaint about the insert regarding the chief building inspector, Eastern Region, Tommy Harrington. In a telephone interview with Harrington in New Zealand, several allegations of fraud and corruption within the building control team are made by him. The complainant's response to these allegations is that Mr Harrington was investigated for misconduct and that he resigned and went to New Zealand after he was confronted by the internal auditors. They also deny that he was a senior manager as indicated in the insert, stating that the chief building inspector is a junior manager. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to determine the correctness or not of the complainant's statements. The question is whether the respondent's comment was an honest expression of opinion and was presented in such manner that it appeared clearly to be comment, and was made on facts truly stated or fairly indicated and referred to. The respondent's argument in this regard is that the allegations made by Harrington were in the public domain, and that they submitted two newspaper reports (annexures Z5 and Z6 respectively) upon which they based their allegations. They further submitted Harrington's letter of resignation including his reasons for doing so, and letters of complaint by the public (annexures Z3 and Z4 respectively). It appears that the respondent had sufficient facts upon which they based their allegations, and it cannot be said that they violated clause 35. For these reasons this complaint is dismissed.

 
[2009] JOL 23467 (BCCSA) at 29

Conclusion

[45]    The result of this long and arduous quasi-legal battle is that no contravention of the Broadcasting Code of Conduct was found and all the Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality's complaints against Carte Blanche are dismissed.



Footnotes
1	  See the "Comprehensive response to the allegations contained in the Carte Blanche programme, broadcast on 5 October 2008" – Annexure Z7.
2	 See, inter alia, South African National Defence Union v Minister of Defence & another 1999 (4) SA 469 (CC) [also reported at 1999 (6) BCLR 615 (CC)–Ed] and S v Mamabolo 2001 (3) SA 409 (CC) [also reported at [2001] JOL 8222 (CC)–Ed].
3	 2004 (6) SA 329 (SCA) [also reported at [2004] JOL 12852 (SCA)–Ed].
4	 At paras [65]–[66].
5	 Goodwin v United Kingdom (1996) 22 EHRR 123.

Appearance:
Adv J Nalane, Mr R Makopo (Legal Department, Tshwane), Ms L Kunene (Renqe Kunene Incorporated) (C); Dr D Milo, Ms N Ntombela (Webber Wentzel), Mr G Mazarakis, Ms S Purén (Carte Blanche) (R)


End of Document