



Smyth v Anglorand Securities Ltd [2022] JOL 53958 (LC)
Judgments Online

Division: Johannesburg
Case No: JS 751 / 18
Hearing Date(s): 05 / 11 / 2020, 20–22 / 09 / 2021, 24–28 / 01 / 2022
Judgment Date(s): 28 / 03 / 2022
Bench: S Snyman AJ


Keywords


Labour and Employment — Protected disclosures — Dismissal — Occupational detriment

Mini Summary


Alleging that he had been dismissed by the respondent for having made a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000, the applicant brought a claim in terms of section 191(5)(b) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 concerning an automatically unfair dismissal as a result of having made such disclosure.

The respondent (“ARS”) started out business as a trader on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and branched out to include other forms of financial services as well. In dealing with clients’ funds and assets entrusted to it, the utmost good faith and integrity was essential, which was ensured by various regulatory measures.

The applicant was Chief Operating Officer for ARS and a “Key Individual” in terms of the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act 37 of 2002 for one of its subsidiaries. He therefore carried statutory responsibilities and would personally face consequences if there was a failure to comply with the regulatory provisions.

Of the view that the respondent had acted in contravention of the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, the applicant took advice and then set out his concerns in the disclosure that he later made to the Financial Services Board. That led to the respondent charging the applicant and finding him guilty of making a disclosure which was without merit to the detriment of the company. He was then dismissed.

Held that no employee may be subjected to any occupational detriment by his employer due to having made a protected disclosure. The court explained when a disclosure would be protected. Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Protected Disclosures Act list disclosures made to an attorney to obtain advice, to the employer and to various prescribed bodies as being protected. Section 9 deals with disclosures to persons and bodies other than those prescribed in sections 5-8. Good faith is a core requirement although it is not necessary for the purposes of establishing good faith that it be proven that information disclosed was correct or true. The employee must reasonably believe that the information is substantially true. The employee must not make the disclosure as a quid pro quo for being promised some benefit, payment, advantage or other kind of reward (unless legally prescribed).

Once it has been established that the employee has made a disclosure of information which qualifies as a protected disclosure under the PDA, the next step is to then determine whether the employee has been visited with an occupational detriment by his or her employer as a result of or because of making such a protected disclosure. That entails the application of a causation test.

Applying the above principles to the facts in this matter, the court found the disclosure made by the applicant to be a protected one. The applicant also satisfied the causation test and his dismissal was found to constitute an occupational detriment. The dismissal was ruled automatically unfair.

The respondent was ordered to pay 16 months’ remuneration as compensation to the applicant in an amount of R1 598 481.92.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 2




SNYMAN AJ:  

Introduction

[1]    Standing as a silent observer in the face of misconduct by another creates a fertile breeding ground in which the misconduct can flourish. The situation is  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 3
exacerbated by the fact that it would often be that only action taken by such an observer that would cause the misconduct to be brought to light, and then be hopefully dealt with, prevented and/or eliminated. In this regard, the following well known quote springs to mind: "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing."1 John Stuart Mill2 better described it as follows: "Let not any one pacify his conscience by the delusion that he can do no harm if he takes no part, and forms no opinion. Bad men need nothing more to compass their ends, than that good men should look on and do nothing." One can hardly do better, especially in the context of the employment relationship, than to refer to the following dicta in Tshishonga v Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development and another3:

". . . there is growing recognition that whistleblowers need protection. Whistleblowing is healthy for organizations. Managers no longer have a monopolistic control over information. They have to be alert to their actions being monitored and reported on to shareholders and the public. Everyone is alive to their loyalty to the organization. As a safe alternative to silence, whistleblowing deters abuse.

If employees did not turn a blind eye or were not afraid to rock the boat and if employers did not turn a deaf ear or blame the messenger instead of heeding the message, many catastrophes could have been averted."

[2]    But the brave and responsible act of deciding not to stand by and do nothing, but rather to take the positive step of taking part in action reporting perpetrators of wrongdoing, often has negative consequences for the actor. As a result, such actors need to be afforded the necessary legislative protection. This protection encourages observers of maleficence to come forward knowing that the law is on their side. Especially in the employment environment, where employees in discharging their day-to-day duties may become observers of this wrongdoing and are the only ones who would have such knowledge and ability to report wrongdoing, such employees must be  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 4
properly immunised from retribution by their employers, if they decide to come forward about it.4 This is where the Protected Disclosures Act (PDA)5 comes in. As held in National Institute for the Humanities and Social Sciences v Lephoto and another6:

"The PDA is an important piece of legislation and is part of the overall framework which ensures that the exercise of both public and private power should be conducted in a transparent and accountable way. It seeks to create a climate in which employees, whether in the private and the public sector, are able to disclose information regarding unlawful and irregular conduct by employers or other employees in the employ of the employer in a manner which will not result in any occupational detriment to a person who commendably considers that the organisation, in which he or she works, should operate legally and in a meticulously regular fashion. . . ."

[3]    In casu, and according to the applicant, he was such an observer that acted and was visited with retribution by his employer, the respondent, manifested in the form of his dismissal. As a result, the applicant pursued a claim against the respondent by way of a statement of claim filed in terms of rule 6 of the Rules for the Conduct of Proceedings in the Labour Court (the rules).7 The applicant's claim was brought in terms of section 191(5)(b) of the Labour Relations Act (LRA)8, as a claim concerning an automatic unfair dismissal as a result of having made a protected disclosure.9 The claim was opposed by the respondent, who filed an answering statement on 19 October 2018.10 The parties then conducted a pretrial, and concluded a pretrial minute which was filed on 7 November 2018.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 5

[4]    The matter first came before me on trial first on 5 November 2020. The Covid-19 pandemic resulted in some delays, and the trial only concluded on 28 January 2022. I reserved judgment at the conclusion of the proceedings. I shall now decide this matter in this judgment by first setting out the relevant background facts.

Background facts

[5]    In the end, much of the essential factual matrix in this matter was fortunately either common cause, or undisputed.

[6]    The respondent started out business as a trader on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) many years ago. The respondent was in fact one of the first entities registered to trade on the JSE. In and during 2012, and realising that in the ever-changing world it will be more and more difficult to earn an acceptable income just by trading on the JSE, the respondent's former proprietor, Richard Bonnichsen (Bonnichsen), appreciated the need to branch out the respondent's operations (business) to include other forms of financial services as well. As a result, what was ultimately established pursuant to these objectives was known as the Anglorand Group (the Group). The Group consisted of the respondent itself, referred to in this judgment for ease of reference as "ARS", Anglorand Asset Managers (Pty) Ltd (AAM), Anglorand Forex (Pty) Ltd, Anglorand Trader (Pty) Ltd and Anglorand Derivates (Pty) Ltd. From a legal structuring perspective, all the other entities were subsidiaries of ARS.

[7]    AAM is a financial services provider, providing financial advisory and intermediary services to clients outside the realm of the JSE. At all times, AAM's operations were regulated by the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act (FAIS Act)11 and the various regulatory provisions under that Act. ARS itself, as member of the JSE, was regulated by the Financial Markets Act (FMA)12 and the various JSE regulations. Because both ARS and AAM are responsible for dealing with clients' funds and assets entrusted to them, utmost good faith and integrity is essential, which is secured by all the aforesaid regulatory measures.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 6

[8]    Where it comes to the applicant, he commenced employment with ARS on 1 March 2008, right at the bottom of the ladder, so to speak, as an assistant in the research department. He worked his way up through the ranks and moved to AAM in 2016, but remained employed in ARS. He was ultimately appointed as the Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the whole Anglorand Group with effect from 15 May 2017. This appointment was confirmed in a letter of appointment in which his roles were defined as follows:

". . .

Head of Securities: functions include Admin, Compliance, Client Mandates, Product Development and Distribution, and PWM management;
Dave will work closely with all dealers, admin team and the finance team on the daily operation;
Marketing Manager;
Dave will oversee the development of Anglorand Securities, Asset managers, Tradevest Global and other new divisions;
Dave will be the new EXCO member on the daily operation, that work closely with Graeme, Salma, and Monica;

Dave will also be part of the Investment Banking Division with specific global asset management projects. These projects include SPAC listings on the JSE, Debt Instruments (Panda Bonds) and general advisory work"

The applicant was also a director of ARS and AAM.

[9]    The FAIS Act requires the appointment of what is defined as a "Key Individual", which is a natural person responsible for managing, overseeing the activities of the body rendering any financial services. The applicant was the appointed key individual for AAM. As such, he was accountable to the Financial Services Board (FSB) and any other applicable Regulators for the conduct of AAM and its compliance with the regulatory provisions of the FAIS Act. As key  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 7
individual, the applicant carried statutory responsibilities and would personally face consequences if there was a failure to comply with the regulatory provisions.

[10]    Llewelyn Geoffrey Carter (Carter), the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the whole Anglorand Group, testified for the respondent. He testified that the day-to-day management of the business was conducted by way of an Executive Committee (Exco). He also testified that the Group, with all the subsidiaries, had been sold to Chinese Investors in 2015/2016, and after 2016, these investors became more actively involved in the business, in particular Daniel Ji (Ji) and Monica Ma (Ma). Also, and after 2016, Carter became the non-executive chairman of the Group, and the COO was Lewis Palmer (Palmer)13. Ji was the CEO and Ma the Deputy CEO. When Palmer resigned in 2017, it was then that the applicant was appointed as COO. Therefore, and as from May 2017, Exco, inter alia, consisted of Ji as CEO, Ma as Deputy CEO, Carter as chairman, and the applicant as COO.

[11]    Carter testified that as non-executive chairman, he was not involved in the day-to-day running and operations of the Group. He stated that he was principally only involved in respect of participating in Exco meetings, which in the ordinary course took place once per week. In these Exco meetings, all operational issues, finance, revenue, costs, HR issues, and strategies, were discussed and decided. However, and in December 2017, Carter was asked to become the CEO of the Group, and he then took up that role.

[12]    According to Carter, and even before the sale of the Group in 2016, it had become apparent that the continued membership of ARS on the JSE was not a viable proposition. The fees levied by the JSE were simply too excessive considering the income generated by ARS from trading on the JSE, and these fees, in 2017, was about R1.5 million per year, which actually exceeded the revenue generated from trading on the JSE. In short, the business was simply not profitable and was being funded by the shareholders.

[13]    It was common cause that it was decided by Exco in 2017 that it would be financially beneficial to the Group if it were to service clients as a financial  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 8
services provider rather than a business servicing clients on the JSE. As a result, Exco started exploring options of alternative trading platforms of service providers that did not require JSE membership. This included the service providers Peregrine, Sasfin and Saxo. Ultimately, Saxo was chosen as the preferred platform by Exco.

[14]    It was common cause that in general terms, all the clients of ARS would move from the BDA system on the JSE, onto the Saxo platform, by way of what was called a "negative novation". This process would lead to a novation of all the clients of ARS into AAM and from AAM to an identified service provider, in this case being the chosen Saxo trading platform. In simple terms, the ARS clients on the JSE would become AAM clients in Saxo. Once this had been done, then ARS would be able to terminate its membership of the JSE, saving all the costs associated with such membership.

[15]    The conundrum ARS faced was how to practically bring about this transition, considering it involved approximately 1 400 clients of ARS. The problem was exacerbated by the fact that because of its long operating history, ARS came with what was referred to in this case as the "non-FICA" clients. These were clients that were not subjected to verification as contemplated by the Financial and Intelligence Centre Act (FICA)14, and as a result, no alternative platform wanted to accept these clients. Carter explained that these clients came into the business when a client was still taken in and serviced based on a handshake without all the regulatory paperwork now required. These clients were not in regular contact with ARS.

[16]    A "negative novation" is conducted by a notice being sent to all clients of ARS, informing such clients of the intention to move their portfolios from the JSE onto the Saxo trading platform, as clients of AAM. This notice calls upon the clients to voice their objection (if any) within a specified period of time, and if no response or objection is received, it will be deemed that the novation is approved by the clients. This negative novation letter was sent to all clients on 23 October 2017, and gave them until 27 October 2017 to respond.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 9

[17]    But this still left the problem of the non-FICA clients that the Saxo platform would not accept, and which clients were not readily contactable. Although only constituting about 135 clients of the ARS client base, these clients still represented a value of R20.24 million. According to Carter, and because Saxo would not accept these clients, a solution was found in consultation with Saxo, being that these clients would be, for the want of a better description, indirectly moved onto the Saxo platform under the name of ARS. So, and in simple terms, ARS would be "the client" that moved onto Saxo, and all the individual non-FICA clients would in essence be "sub-clients" under ARS. But this would only be a temporary solution to at least effect transition onto Saxo.

[18]    On the above basis, it was common cause that the transition of most of the ARS clients, including the non-FICA clients, was brought about into AAM and in turn onto the Saxo platform, by beginning November 2017.15 However, and as Carter explained, this still did not completely resolve the problem of the non-FICA clients, because, individually, they would remain as clients on the JSE, even though they had been transitioned onto the Saxo platform under the name of ARS, which in turn meant ARS could not terminate its membership of the JSE.

[19]    As a result, a meeting was set up between ARS and representatives of the JSE, which meeting took place on 13 November 2017. The applicant was in attendance at that meeting, with Carter acting as the spokesperson for ARS. Representing the JSE was Yekeen Hutheram (Hutheram), the Manager: Membership Supervision at the JSE. Carter informed the JSE of the intention of ARS to surrender its JSE licence. Carter then sought advice from the JSE as to how the non-FICA clients should be treated, so as to enable ARS to withdraw from the JSE. The issue of what advice was actually given by the JSE was in contention between the parties, and will be dealt with later in this judgment. Suffice it say, no definitive course of action for ARS relating to the non-FICA clients was proposed by the JSE.

[20]    It must be stated that at the time when the above meeting with the JSE was conducted, all the assets of the non-FICA clients of ARS were already in the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 10
custody of Saxo. The JSE was not informed that such an asset transfer had already taken place by way of negative novation.

[21]    The meeting of 13 November 2017 was followed up by Carter by way of an email to Hutheram, sent on 15 November 2017, in which Carter stated the following:16

". . . At this point, may I confirm that you are in agreement that ARS may liquidate securities and/or use cash held on behalf of the Non-FICA clients (that have been dormant for over 10 years) in order that ARS can recover administrative fees that have not been charged to these clients? I wish to clean up this base as well which will assist ARS in making decisions regarding its JSE license. . . ."

[22]    Hutheram answered on the same day (15 November 2017), as follows:

". . . I have chatted to our legal division more on your below email. We are not in a position to endorse your proposal, as it does come down to what has been agreed to in the contract/mandate with each client. (This would be applicable to non-discretionary and discretionary clients.) Should the mandate indicate you have the right to recover any fees from the client's assets, then you may go ahead and recover any outstanding fees from the cash balance or liquidate the securities in the account. In the event you liquidate the securities, and there still remains a surplus of cash after the fees recovery, this cash must still be returned to the client (I do take note that you had mentioned you have extensively tried to contact these clients with no success). In addition, if you are able to liquidate securities, it will also make the process easier if you only have client cash, instead of client script, should you decide to terminate your membership in the future. Should the client have a claim to their assets in years to come, the entity must be able to demonstrate how the client's assets/liabilities were accounted for and return any assets due to them (if the entity is still in possession of the assets or donated them via the Guardians funds or similar structure) – hence it is important to revert to what was in the client agreement.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 11

Unfortunately, it is not as simple as I thought it would be when we met, but please seek the original mandate as that will guide you as what you may or may not do.

Just an additional comment, please keep all evidence to demonstrate the firm has done everything in their power to KYC the client and hence the above options are your last resort on closing these accounts."

[23]    Following the above, it must have been clear to Carter that the advice by the JSE entailed that a proper mandate had to be obtained from each of the non-FICA clients, and that their assets could only be sold in terms of such a mandate obtained. In fact, Carter took it upon himself to personally pursue this objective, trying to trace all the non-FICA clients, using the resources of his own law firm and his personal assistant at the law firm, Cherie Atkins, who was also the Company Secretary of AAM. As will be further discussed below, this exercise was largely unsuccessful. What was common cause is that the applicant was not involved in this process, at the insistence of Carter, despite the applicant offering his assistance.

[24]    All the above left the issue of the non-FICA clients and ARS's withdrawal from the JSE very much unresolved. Also, the applicant was effectively excluded from further involvement in the resolving process. The next time the applicant knew of progress was when he noticed that the shares of the non-FICA clients were being traded on Saxo. It appeared that on 29 January 2018, Carter issued instructions to Leon Hanekom (Hanekom), one of the dealers of ARS based in Cape Town, to sell the shares of all non-FICA clients on the Saxo system. The applicant, despite being involved in the process before, being a member of Exco, and being responsible for regulatory compliance in the Group, was not consulted by Carter nor in any manner involved in this decision to sell the non-FICA client shares.

[25]    As far as the applicant was aware at this time, these share sales were not mandated by the non-FICA clients, and this, as far as he was concerned, was irregular and constituted an impropriety. By law, ARS must have what is called a "Compliance Officer", which in the case of ARS at the time was tasked to a third-party contractor, being Dawn Julyan (Julyan). As part of his duties, the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 12
applicant would have regular meetings with Julyan, and such a meeting was scheduled for 1 February 2018. In this meeting, the applicant then considered it prudent to inform her about the above share sales, his concerns about the same, and to seek advice from her about the regularity of these transactions. Julyan suggested that the applicant seek advice from the FSB.

[26]    However, and coincidentally in the actual course of this meeting between the applicant and Julyan, Anna Sofia (Annatjie) Delport, who has since become married and is now Annatjie Higgins (Higgins), the Head of Administration of ARS,17 came into the meeting to report to the applicant that she had received an instruction from Ma that same day which she (Higgins) was not comfortable with and believed was irregular. Higgins presented the applicant with a copy of an email dated 1 February 2018 from Ma to Higgins which contained the instruction, in which email the applicant was not even copied, but Carter was. This instruction read as follows:

". . . Next Monday, we can collect all cash from these 2 activities to Standard Bank account 5905 first.

Once you have the final number of total cash, below is what we will do, per JSE suggestion:

Move 5M rand to Geoff's Trust account, under ARS's name.
Move all the rest to Bank of China ARS account. We will put them into fix deposit, and a resolution that need 3 people to sign same time. (Their might be other ways Geoff is working on, but we can put them at fixed deposit first, till other better options.)
There might be some fees we need to reduce first from the total amount, I will get it from Geoff and Cherie.

Resolution will be signed by ARS board regarding the arrangement as well." (sic)

[27]    It turned out that this instruction related to the cash proceeds of the share sales conducted by Hanekom of the shares of the non-FICA clients. Prior to  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 13
this instruction, the proceeds of these share sales would be in the account of each individual client. It was common cause that this instruction18 would mean, if carried out, that the funds belonging to the individual clients be transferred to the normal ARS business account where it would not be segregated and mixed with other funds, including ARS's own funds. It was also common cause that there was no mandate by any non-FICA clients to move the funds into a third-party trust account or other unknown accounts at the Bank of China. As touched on above, the total value of this was about R20.3 million. And lastly, it was common cause that the Standard Bank account referred to in this instruction by Ma was ARS's ordinary trading (operating) account.

[28]    According to the applicant, the initial share sales followed by the instruction to transfer the funds was in contravention of the FAIS Act and irregular, and thus constituted an impropriety. The details of his concerns were set out in the disclosure that he later made, which will be dealt with below.

[29]    Being the appointed key individual of AAM, and as advised by Julyan, the applicant met with representatives of the FSB on 2 February 2018 to seek advice on what he should do about these apparent irregularities. He was informed by the FSB to make a statement about the events, and to take steps to ensure that the transfer of funds should not take place. The applicant also called Hutheram at the JSE to ascertain whether there may have been any developments after the meeting of 13 November 2017 the applicant was not aware of, and the applicant was informed by Hutheram that there were no further developments. Finally, the applicant sent an email to Peter Johnson (Johnson) of Saxo, instructing him that Saxo should not accept any instruction to transfer funds out of the individual non-FICA client accounts without the applicant's approval, which Johnson agreed to do.

[30]    In line with what he was advised to do, and over the weekend of 3 and 4 February 2018, the applicant sought legal advice, drafted a disclosure statement and had the statement commissioned on 5 February 2018. He then delivered the disclosure statement on 5 February 2018, in the following sequence: (1) he first delivered the same by email to his attorney; (2) he next delivered the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 14
disclosure statement to the FSB; and (3) he delivered the disclosure statement to Carter and Ma that afternoon, both by hand and email.

[31]    The disclosure statement was in the form of an affidavit and was headed as being a protected disclosure under the PDA. It was addressed to the FSB. The gist of the content of the disclosure was the following:

The applicant had reason to believe that he would be subjected to an occupational detriment for making the disclosures.
The disclosures made related to instructions given by the Group CEO (Carter) and the Deputy CEO (Ma), which instructions according to the applicant was evidence of impropriety, and the applicant was concerned that disclosing the impropriety to his employer could possibly lead to its concealment.
The core of the alleged impropriety was a contravention of the principle that all client funds must at all times be segregated from the funds of the Anglorand Group. A further alleged cause of impropriety was that the shares of non-FICA clients were being traded without their mandate.
As to the actual details of the alleged impropriety, the applicant summarised most of the events as set out above. His concerns were based on the following core contentions:
Having attended the meeting with the JSE of 13 November 2017, it was his conclusion from the meeting that the JSE will seek clarity on what to do with the non-FICA clients, however ARS should not proceed with any action unless authorised in writing by the JSE.
Subsequent to this meeting, Carter said that he would be personally attending to the non-FICA clients. Despite the applicant offering assistance in this regard, Carter declined to include him in this process. 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 15
The applicant came to know of the email exchange between Carter and Hutheram referred to above, in which, according to the applicant, the JSE had answered a request by Carter for the JSE's agreement that the securities of the non-FICA clients be liquidated and cash held be used, to the effect that the JSE could not endorse such a proposal as it would only come down to what the client had authorised in the client mandate. The applicant expressed his concern that he was excluded in this email exchange by Carter.
Carter then instructed Hanekom on 29 January 2018 to sell the shares of the non-FICA clients on the Saxo system. According to the applicant, he was under the impression that despite the move to Saxo, ARS would still not be able to trade on these accounts, as it would be denoted as an ITA (the Saxo term for a non-FICA account). As soon as the applicant realised that these trades were done, he was compelled to take action. The applicant was concerned that despite being the COO of the Group and key individual in AAM (to where the non-FICA clients were novated), he was not even consulted on this course of action.
Carter had been telling employees that the key individual position was not a position of consequence and that employees should report directly to Carter and that his instructions had to be obeyed.
The applicant became aware of the 1 February 2018 instruction from Ma, when it was reported to him by Higgins. According to the applicant, the instruction was unlawful, as it would move the proceeds of the share sales of the non-FICA clients into the ARS business account and thereafter R5 million to Carter's trust account and the balance of some R15 million into a Bank of China account, thereby contravening the essential requirement of maintaining a separation of clients' funds and contravening section 21 of the FMA. The applicant was also concerned by the fact that the instruction was suggested as being in terms of a  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 16
"JSE suggestion", which in the applicant's knowledge was never suggested by the JSE. The applicant was also once again concerned that he was not brought into this instruction and that it was not even copied to him as COO.
The applicant further contended that the non-FICA clients had already been moved to AAM, yet the instruction was to move the funds into the business account of ARS, over which AAM had no formal relationship, and which placed it "out of sight" of the AAM administration.
Lastly, the applicant expressed the concern that Carter and Ma (especially Carter), who took it upon themselves to deal with the non-FICA clients, did not do enough to come into contact with the non-FICA clients and obtain their mandates. He gave two examples of difficulties that had in fact arisen because of the sale of these clients' shares without mandates.
The applicant first sought advice from the external AAM compliance officer (Julyan), who in turn referred the applicant to the FSB. The applicant met with representatives of the FSB on 2 February 2018, who advised the applicant to ensure that these transfers in terms of the instruction by Ma should not take place.
The applicant also called Hutheram on 2 February 2018, who confirmed to the applicant that the JSE has never approved the plan to liquidate the shares of the non-FICA clients and transfer the proceeds. Hutheram told the applicant that what must happen must be determined by the client mandates. Hutheram also sent the applicant the email communication between himself and Carter on 15 November 2017.
The applicant then contacted Johnson at Saxo on 2 February 2018, and instructed him not to make the fund transfers. He also confirmed this instruction to Johnson in an email sent on the same date. 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 17
The applicant was concerned that considering his actions in blocking the transfer of the funds in terms of the instruction by Ma and Carter, Ma would resort to taking action against him which would cause him an occupational detriment.
The applicant viewed the impropriety as exceptionally serious, as it related to the handling of funds of 135 clients to the total value of R20.3 million, and the senior management of the Anglorand Group had embarked upon a plan that contravened the basic guideline of the segregation of funds relating to these clients.

[32]    It was common cause that the respondent had a code of conduct and ethics (the Ethics Code) in place at the time. The purpose of the Ethics Code, in clause 3 thereof, was, inter alia, to promote honest and ethical conduct by all employees, to promote "full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure" in reports and documents that company submits to regulators from time to time, and to promote compliance with all applicable laws. Clause 8 of the Ethics Code prescribes the procedure to adopt in reporting violations. Clause 8.2 places an obligation on the employee to report violations the employee becomes aware of, and records that ". . . This Policy is designed to provide an atmosphere of open communication for compliance issues and to ensure that employees acting in good faith have the means to report actual or potential violations". Employees, in terms of clause 8.3, are required to report violations to the Deputy CEO. Clause 8.5 guarantees that there will be no reprisals against employees for good faith reporting of "compliance concerns or violations".

[33]    In this case, it is common cause that the applicant did not report the violations complained of to the Deputy CEO in terms of clause 8.3 of the Ethics Code. The applicant however explained, in his disclosure statement, that he was unable to report the impropriety to Ma (who was the Deputy CEO) in terms of the Ethics Code, as Ma was the very person that gave the instruction that was a main part of the cause of the alleged impropriety.

[34]    Separately, and at the same time when the applicant was delivering his disclosure statement on 5 February 2018, Carter for the first time had sight of  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 18
the instruction by Ma to Higgins on 1 February 2018, such instruction having been copied to him (but as said, not the applicant). Carter conceded that once the funds were moved out of the individual client accounts and into the ARS business account, the Segregation of Funds Rule would be violated. Carter sent an email to Ma on 5 February 2018, copied to Higgins, in which he said that "Hold back on doing the below please. Wait for my instructions".

[35]    Ma was undeterred. She answered the email from Carter of 5 February 2018, enquiring whether at least they could do "step 1" of "collecting the cash", clearly referring to the transfer of the funds from the individual client accounts into the ARS trading account. Carter answered: "This can happen but no payment out as yet", in other words that the transfer of the funds to ARS were in order, but the payment out of ARS to his trust account and the Bank of China accounts were not yet to take place.

[36]    Clearly in reaction to the applicant's disclosure, the FSB sent an email to Carter on 12 February 2018, which Carter answered the same day. In this email correspondence exchange, Carter confirmed to the FSB that clients were novated from ARS to the Saxo trading platform as clients of AAM. Carter also confirmed that 1 400 clients were so novated of which only 7.8% were non-FICA clients. Carter further confirmed the accounts of the clients were liquidated, but disputed a contention that an instruction had been issued to transfer the funds to ARS's operating account. Carter informed the FSB that what was set out in the instruction of 1 February 2018 as to a transfer to other accounts was only "mooted and a suggestion".

[37]    On 19 February 2018, Carter called for a shareholders' meeting, which meeting then took place on 28 February 2018. In this meeting, it was resolved that the applicant had to resign as a director of ARS, AAM and all of the other Group entities. In an email on 2 March 2018 to the applicant in which Carter demands the applicant's resignations as director, he also writes: ". . . independently the members of Exco have conveyed to me their dissatisfaction of what and how you are attending to various matters. As a whole Exco has lost confidence in you and accordingly you will no longer serve as member of Exco" (emphasis added). Carter also required that any communication by the applicant to any Regulator first be approved by him. Ma and Carter were then  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 19
added as Directors of AAM without the applicant even being notified or consulted.

[38]    Further following the disclosure statement sent to it by the applicant, the FSB on 5 March 2018 addressed formal correspondence to AAM, stating the following:

". . .

The Registrar is in receipt of information that there are clients that were 'novated' from Anglorand Securities Limited to the Saxo Capital Markets trading platform as clients of Anglorand Asset Managers.
Some of the above included client accounts which were FICA non-compliant.
The accounts of the said clients were liquidated and an instruction has allegedly been issued to transfer such funds into Anglorand Securities' bank account. The Registrar is also advised that there is an intention to transfer the funds into the account of Mr Carter and an Anglorand Securities account in the Bank of China.
Section 2 of the General Code of Conduct for Authorised Financial Services Providers and Representatives, 2003, states that a provider must at all times render financial services honestly, fairly, with due skill, care and diligence, and in the interests of clients and the integrity of the financial services industry.
In terms of section 10 of the General Code client funds and/or assets must be segregated from business or any other funds and/or assets. These must be dealt with in accordance with the mandate given to the provider.
The Registrar hereby states that proceeding with the above would be a contravention of legislation that will result in action being taken against the responsible individual and entities. This may include also referring the matter to any other competent authority."

[39]    The applicant, in a lengthy email on 7 March 2018 to Carter and Ma, pointed out that he was accountable to the FSB for the conduct of AAM, and as the key individual, he was ultimately responsible for impropriety on the part of  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 20
AAM. He explained why his disclosure on 5 February 2018 was a protected disclosure in keeping with his statutory duties. He also set out various further occupational detriments he had been visited with after making the disclosure. And lastly, he pointed out that it would be very difficult for him to continue to function as key individual if he was required to resign from all his official positions as demanded by Carter, and in particular, that he would not be able to function as COO if he was not on Exco.

[40]    At some point in time during all the events as set out above, Carter and Ma consulted Fluxmans attorneys (Fluxmans). Carter could not recall exactly when this happened. Following this consultation, Fluxmans on 8 March 2018 addressed a letter to the applicant, on behalf of Carter and Ma. In this letter, Fluxmans specifically dealt with the disclosure statement the applicant had made. It was contended that the applicant's statements made in the disclosure statement were spurious and defamatory. Issue was also taken with the fact that the applicant had involved the FSB in the matter and that the FSB had sent the aforesaid letter of 5 March 2018 to the respondent. It is important to have specific regard to the following sentiments as expressed by Fluxmans in this letter:

It was stated that the applicant was well aware that the instruction to transfer the funds was given in accordance with the process of moving clients to the Saxo trading platform, and there was no reason to believe that the instruction was not given in good faith.
The applicant was aware of all the difficulties relating to the non-FICA clients, was himself involved in discussions relating to these clients as well as the meeting with the JSE on 13 November 2017, however he waited four months to make the disclosure, which was indicative of it being contrived.
In terms of the correspondence between Carter and the JSE following the meeting on 13 November 2017, the instruction given by Ma followed on the advice of the JSE. 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 21
The basis for the transfer of the liquidated funds was to allocate and safeguard the funds so it could be returned to clients in the future.
There was no reasonable basis upon which any impropriety could be suspected, and it implausible that there was any wrongdoing on the part of ARS/AAM.
As matters stood, the funds had not been transferred and remain segregated from the business account. Even if there was a transgression, such transgression was not intentional and was made on the basis of advice given by the JSE.
It was specifically said that: "Notwithstanding that you were aware that the allegations in your affidavit were false, you proceeded to make them with the deceptive intention to cause reputational harm to our client as well as Anglorand Securities. Your conduct in this regard was in bad faith and your allegations of contravening the Financial Markets Act and/or impropriety on the part of our clients are defamatory."
A demand was made that the applicant cease and desist from making further defamatory statements, provide a written apology to Carter and Ma withdrawing the allegations of impropriety against them, and in essence withdraw the disclosure itself.

[41]    Fluxmans also on 8 March 2018 answered the letter from the FSB of 5 March 2018. It was stated that the allegation of improper handling of client funds was rejected, that options with regard to the treatment of these funds which were provided under the guidance of the JSE were considered, and that the funds in question remained segregated and on the Saxo capital markets trading platform.

[42]    On 9 March 2018, Carter answered the applicant's email of 7 March 2018. In this answer, Carter stated that he was not aware that the applicant was the COO of AAM. He basically disputed everything the applicant said in his email as being "false". He also stated that the applicant failed in his duties, as "manifested" by the applicant's "unlawful and unacceptable action", clearly  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 22
referring to the disclosure. Also now, and for the first time, Carter stated that the applicant's performance was not what was expected of a COO. He concluded that: "The trust with yourself and Exco no longer exists and your unlawful actions to date is reprehensible. Further action in this regard will be forthcoming."

[43]    In an Exco meeting on 12 March 2018, to which the applicant was not invited, it was resolved that his position as COO be abolished, that he was no longer a member of Exco, and that further action against him would be instituted. On the same date, a resolution was adopted and sent to Saxo, in terms of which the applicant was removed as authorising signatory for client transactions on the Saxo platform.

[44]    On 15 March 2018 Schliemann Incorporated, acting for the applicant, answered the letter from Fluxmans of 8 March 2018 sent to the applicant. In this answer it was stated that the applicant had reported the matter in terms of his statutory obligations, the statements were the truth, and were not made in a public forum, but to a regulatory body namely the FSB. It was contended that as a result, the disclosure could not be seen to be defamation. It was reiterated that the sale of the non-FICA client shares was not part of the move to the Saxo platform, because this move was completed in early November 2017, and the sale and attempted fund removal only happened end January/early February 2018. It was pointed out that the applicant was aware of the move to Saxo in 2017 and was part of this process, but was not part of nor aware of the sale of shares and the attempted fund removal the following year, as Carter took control of the process. It was reiterated that the JSE did not endorse this latter course of action. As to the funds not actually having been transferred, it was stated that the share sale was already a contravention, and that it was due to the applicant's efforts that the fund transfer was stopped even considering the subsequent email exchange between Carter and Ma on 5 February 2018. Reference was made to contradictions between the letter to the applicant and the letter to the FSB. And finally, the applicant made it clear that the letter to the applicant was contrary to the protection afforded to him by the PDA.

[45]    Almost immediately following this latest letter from the applicant's attorneys, he was suspended on 19 March 2018. Carter testified that this suspension  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 23
notice was prepared by Fluxmans. The suspension notice mirrored the charges later proffered against the applicant. On 1 May 2018 the applicant received a notification to attend a disciplinary enquiry, which included some 18 charges, one of which was specifically a charge relating to the making of the disclosure. Carter confirmed that Fluxmans also prepared the disciplinary hearing notification.

[46]    Fluxmans, on 26 March 2018, answered the letter from Schliemann Incorporated of 15 March 2018. It was stated in this answer that the disclosure by the applicant was not protected by the PDA, as the applicant had "intentionally disclosed false information knowing the information to be false or where he ought reasonably to have known that the information is false . . .". It was further contended that there were no contraventions as no funds of clients were transferred, which contention was coupled with a specific statement that ". . . an intention to commit an offence does not constitute the commission of an offence . . .". It was further explained (for the first time) that the reasons why the instruction of 1 February 2018 was not carried out was because the respondent was "uncertain as to the consequences of doing so and decided to recall the instruction so they could take further advice from the JSE in this regard . . .". It was even suggested that the respondent was entitled to liquidate accounts to recover fees, an issue Carter however specifically disavowed in evidence, saying this was not possible.

[47]    On 17 May 2018 the disciplinary hearing commenced, presided over by Advocate Gail Blacher (Blacher), briefed by Fluxmans, as chairperson.

[48]    On 25 May 2018 the disciplinary hearing outcome was issued by Blacher in which the applicant was found guilty of all the charges that included the charge of: "You have vindictively and maliciously made a 'protected disclosure' to the detriment of the company and the group and its shareholders, which disclosure is without merit." Blacher recommended the summary dismissal of the applicant. This recommendation was accepted by ARS and the applicant was dismissed 1 June 2018.

[49]    The applicant referred an automatic unfair dismissal dispute to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) on 5 June  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 24
2018, contending he had been dismissed for having made a protected disclosure in terms of the PDA, and that this was an automatic unfair dismissal in terms of section 187(1)(h) of the LRA. This dispute was unsuccessfully conciliated on 10 July 2018, and then referred to this Court for adjudication.

The PDA

[50]    As a point of departure in deciding this case, I firstly refer to the fact that the PDA provides that "No employee may be subjected to any occupational detriment by his or her employer on account, or partly on account, of having made a protected disclosure".19 Starting with the concept of a "disclosure", section 1(1)(i) of the PDA defines the term "disclosure" as follows:

"Any disclosure of information regarding any conduct of an employer, or an employee of that employer, made by any employee who has reason to believe that the information concerned shows or tends to show one or more of the following:

(a) That a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely to be committed;
(b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which that person is subject;
(c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur;
(d) that the health or safety of an individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered;
(e) that the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged;
(f) unfair discrimination as contemplated in the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act 4 of 2000); or
(g) that any matter referred to in paragraphs (a) to (f) has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed."

[51]    Next, when would the disclosure be a protected disclosure? In deciding this, the court in Palace Group Investments (Pty) Ltd and another v Mackie20 gave the following guidance: 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 25
". . . not all disclosures are protected in the sense of protecting the employee making the disclosure from being subjected to an occupational detriment by the employer implicated in the disclosure. A protected disclosure is defined as a disclosure made to the persons/bodies mentioned in ss 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 and made in accordance with the provisions of each of such sections. In terms of s 6, for a disclosure to fall within the ambit of a protected disclosure it must have been made in good faith. It is clear that before other provisions of the PDA can come into play, the disclosure allegedly made must answer to the definition of that term as set out in the definitions section . . ."

[52]    Section 5 of the PDA provides that a disclosure made to a legal practitioner with the object of and in the course of obtaining legal advice is a protected disclosure. Section 6 provides for the disclosure to be made to the employer of the employee, and prescribes that the disclosure must be made in good faith and pursuant to the procedure prescribed by the employer for making such disclosure where such a procedure exists.21 Sections 8(1)(a) and (b) provide for various prescribed bodies to which a protected disclosure can be made, namely the the Public Protector, South African Human Rights Commission, Commission for Gender Equality, Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities, Public Service Commission and the Auditor-General, provided once again that the disclosure is made in good faith.22 Section 8(1)(c) adds the further requirements that the employee must reasonably believe that the relevant impropriety falls within any description of matters which in the ordinary course are dealt with by that person or body concerned, and that the information and any allegation contained in the disclosure are substantially true.

[53]    Turning then to section 9, it deals with what is called "General Protected Disclosures". This would be disclosures to persons and bodies other than those prescribed in sections 5, 6, 7 and 8. In terms of section 9(1): 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 26
"Any disclosure made in good faith by an employee or worker–

who reasonably believes that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it, are substantially true; and
who does not make the disclosure for purposes of personal gain, excluding any reward payable in terms of any law;

is a protected disclosure if–

one or more of the conditions referred to in subsection (2) apply; and
in all the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable to make the disclosure."

The conditions then prescribed by section 9(2) are as follows:

that at the time the employee or worker who makes the disclosure has reason to believe that he or she will be subjected to an occupational detriment if he or she makes a disclosure to his or her employer in accordance with section 6;
that, in a case where no person or body is prescribed for the purposes of section 8 in relation to the relevant impropriety, the employee or worker making the disclosure has reason to believe that it is likely that evidence relating to the impropriety will be concealed or destroyed if he or she makes the disclosure to his or her employer;
that the employee or worker making the disclosure has previously made a disclosure of substantially the same information to– (i) his or her employer; or (ii) a person or body referred to in section 8, in respect of which no action was taken within a reasonable period after the disclosure; or
that the impropriety is of an exceptionally serious nature."

[54]    Section 9(3) provides that in determining, for the purposes of section 9(1)(ii), whether it is reasonable for the employee to make the disclosure, consideration must be given to the following:

the identity of the person to whom the disclosure is made;
the seriousness of the impropriety;
whether the impropriety is continuing or is likely to occur in the future; 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 27
 (d) whether the disclosure is made in breach of a duty of confidentiality of the employer towards any other person;
in a case falling within subsection (2)(c), any action which the employer or the person or body to whom the disclosure was made, has taken, or might reasonably be expected to have taken, as a result of the previous disclosure;
in a case falling within subsection (2)(c)(i), whether in making the disclosure to the employer the employee or worker complied with any procedure which was authorised by the employer; and
the public interest."

[55]    What the above prescribed structure for making disclosures shows is that there are different considerations applicable to determining whether a disclosure qualifies as a protected disclosure, depending upon the person or body to which the disclosure has been made. As held in Tshishonga, supra:23

"The tests are graduated proportionately to the risks of making disclosure. Thus the lowest threshold is set for disclosures to a legal adviser. Higher standards have to be met once the disclosure goes beyond the employer. The most stringent requirements have to be met if the disclosure is made public or to bodies that are not prescribed, for example the media."

[56]    However, and what is clear from all these prescripts, save of course only where the disclosure is made to a legal representative for the purposes of seeking legal advice, is the core requirement of the existence of "good faith" when the disclosure is made. One must however be careful not to set the bar of "good faith" too high, as doing so may very well defeat the purposes of what the PDA seeks to achieve, as recognised in Radebe and another v Premier, Free State Province and others24. So, it is important to decide what would constitute "good faith" for the purposes of protection under the PDA, which I turn to next.

[57]    First, "good faith", or bona fides, depending how one wants to call it, goes hand in hand with the requirement of "reason to believe" that the information  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 28
constitutes an impropriety as defined in section 1(1) of the PDA. As said in Radebe, supra:25 ". . . If the employee believes that the information is true it would fortify the reasonableness of his belief from which, in turn, his bona fides can be inferred . . .". The court in Radebe gave the following instructive views as to how bona fides can be inferred:26

". . . Whilst good faith and honesty may conceivably amount to the same thing, I am of the view that a case by case approach is the proper one for a court considering these issues. Factors such as reckless abandon, malice or the presence of an ulterior motive aimed at self advancement or revenge, for instance, would lead to a conclusion of lack of good faith. A clear indicator of lack of good faith is also where disingenuity is demonstrated by reliance on fabricated information or information known by the employee to be false. The absence of these elements on the other hand is a strong indicator that the employee honestly made the disclosure wishing for action to be taken to investigate it."

The court in Radebe concluded:27

"Simply stated if an employee discloses information in good faith and reasonably believes that the information disclosed shows or tends to show that improprieties were committed or continue to be committed then the disclosure is one that is protected. The requirement of 'reason to believe' cannot be equated to personal knowledge of the information disclosed. That would set so high a standard as to frustrate the operation of the PDA. . . ."

[58]    It is important to appreciate that it is not necessary for the purposes of establishing good faith that it be proven that information disclosed was correct or true.28 By definition, and in making the disclosure, the employee must only have "reason to believe", not that the information is actually true, but that the information "shows" or "tends to show" that the impropriety "has been" or "is being" or "may be" committed in the future.29 In applying these concepts, the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 29
court in Baxter v Minister of Justice and Correctional Services and others30 held:

". . . it is important to note that the PDA does not require that the disclosures made are factually correct. The phrase 'tends to show' in s 1 of the PDA intends that it is sufficient if the information in the disclosure is indicative of an impropriety. Likewise, the requirement that the employee merely have a reason to believe that the information points to an irregularity does not require personal knowledge of the information disclosed. That would set too high a standard frustrating the operation of the PDA. Hearsay information, depending on its nature and cogency, may provide a basis for a reasonable belief of possible irregularity."

[59]    Also in the above context, the court in John v Afrox Oxygen Ltd31 held:

". . . In Arbuthnot, the court held that 'the enquiry is not about the reasonableness of the information, but about the reasonableness of the belief'. This is so because 'the requirement of "reasonable belief" does not entail demonstrating the correctness of the information, because a belief can still be reasonable even if the information turns out to be inaccurate'."

[60]    The fact that the information concerned may be sensitive to an employer or possibly expose it to possible reputational harm, cannot serve to strip the employee from protection in terms of the PDA. This was appreciated in Potgieter v Tubatse Ferrochrome and others32 where the court held:

"While due regard must be paid to the reputational damage that an organization may suffer as a result of disclosure of adverse information which is prejudicial to its commercial interests, I am of the view that a finding that the mere disclosure of sensitive information renders the employment  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 30
relationship intolerable would, in my view, seriously erode the very protection that the abovementioned legal framework seeks to grant to whistleblowers. . . ."

[61]    Whilst it may be important to consider the motives of the employee in making the disclose [disclosure], it is not necessary for the motives of the employee in making the disclosure to be as pure as the driven snow. The fact that an employee may have some ulterior motives cannot of its own scupper good faith. I venture to say that where ulterior motives or personal aspirations of the employee form the driving force behind making the disclosure, and are coupled with elements like dishonesty, corruption, false statements, and retribution, that good faith will fall by the wayside.33 In short, mixed motives are not incompatible with the existence of good faith as required by the PDA. This was recognised in Baxter, supra, where the court said:34

"In any event, the fact that the appellant may have acted partly out of ulterior motive does not mean that he did not act in good faith (or acted in bad faith) by making the disclosure. Good faith must be assessed contextually on a case-by-case basis, taking account of various factors at play in the specific case. Acting with an ulterior motive is not necessarily the same as acting in bad faith. Acting in bad faith in a strict sense refers to a dishonest intention or a corrupt motive. The information in the disclosures made by the appellant was in fact true in important respects. The appellant did not deceitfully manufacture information or unreasonably exaggerate the wrongdoing that had taken place. There were real problems with the manner in which appointments were being made in the region for which Nxele was responsible. The fact that the appellant acted with some personal animosity or spite is not alone sufficient to conclude that he did not act in good faith. His earlier attempts to challenge the decisions, while somewhat tentative, and perhaps self-serving, reveal that by the time he belatedly made the disclosures (some weeks after being threatened by Nxele) he had mixed motives. In the circumstances it cannot be said that the appellant did not make the disclosures in good faith. In  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 31
the result, the disclosures he made were protected disclosures in terms of the PDA . . ."

[62]    I do accept that the PDA cannot serve as open licence to be abused by employees in order to hide or escape their own misconduct, performance issues or other forms of serious transgressions on their part.35 That is why the motives of an employee would nonetheless always be an important consideration when deciding on the issue of good faith. As held in Lephoto, supra:36

". . . the PDA was not enacted to encourage employees, whose own conduct renders them liable to dismissal, to exploit this legislation in a desperate attempt to fend off the inevitable consequences of their own actions or performance. That the PDA should be interpreted generously in order to vindicate its purpose is one thing, but in a case such as the present, where the facts are overwhelmingly in support of the conclusion that its provisions were abused, the court should have no truck with an attempt to invoke its protection."

[63]    A further consideration relevant in assessing whether good faith exists is what the employee requires to be done in making the disclosure. For example, where the employee asks that the wrong be further investigated, or remedied, or be addressed by a responsible authority, that would an indicator of the existence of good faith.37 It is however not a stated purpose of the PDA to ensure that the subject matter of the disclosure made be investigated or dealt with, as the PDA rather centres around the protection of the employee for making the disclosure.38

[64]    It is always easy, with the benefit of hindsight and with the pressure of the situation at the time having dissipated, to conduct a piece by piece autopsy of  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 32
what the employee did so as to dispel the existence of good faith. That is why, as said in TSB Sugar RSA Ltd (now RCL Food Sugar Ltd) v Dorey39:

". . . The bona fides of the disclosure must be assessed at the time it was made . . ."

[65]    Good faith aside, where the disclosure is made to a third party, meaning a party other then [than] one of the parties prescribed in sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the PDA, there are additional qualifying requirements under section 9 of the PDA, other than the general requirements of reasonable belief and good faith in making the disclosure, for it to be protected. In these cases, the employee must establish, in sequence, that: (1) the employee reasonably believed that the information was substantially true; (2) the disclosure was not made for the purposes of personal gain;40 (3) at least one of the conditions in section 9(2) applies;41 and (4) it was reasonable to have made the disclosure.42

[66]    What is immediately evident from section 9 is that there is an enhanced and double requirement of reasonableness, so to speak. First, the employee must reasonably believe that the information is substantially true, which is a higher standard than the ordinary "good faith" requirement of a reasonable belief that the information is true. I venture to say that in order to establish a reasonable belief that the information is substantially true, the employee must show the existence of an objective justification for his or her belief that the information is true.43 As said in Tshishonga, supra:44 "Information of quality and quantity go to determining whether the disclosure is substantially true . . .". Second, and even if the employee has a reasonable belief that the information is substantially true, the employee must also show that it was reasonable to have made the disclosure in the first place. Thus, it follows that the employee must provide reasonable justification as to why the disclosure could not have been dealt  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 33
with internally in the employer, rather than the disclosure being made to a third party.45 It is in this context that section 9(3) provides guidance, setting out a number of considerations that can be applied to determine whether it was reasonable to make the disclosure.

[67]    Interestingly however, if it is shown that the information concerned is actually true, the fact that it may have been disclosed to such a third party with an ulterior or malicious motive, would not disqualify the disclosure from still being a protected disclosure. This was recognised in Tshishonga, supra, where the court held:46

"A malicious motive cannot disqualify the disclosure if the information is solid. If it did, the unwelcome consequence would be that a disclosure would be unprotected even if it benefits society. Such might be the case of an accountant who out of malice discloses to SARS that his employer is evading taxes. Or, an employee of a trade union who bears a grudge against its management might blow the whistle to the registrar of trade unions that the trade union is not complying with its constitution and the LRA. A malicious motive could affect the remedy awarded to the whistle-blower. . . ."

[68]    Finally, and as to the requirement of personal gain, the employee must not make the disclosure as a quid pro quo for being promised some benefit, payment, advantage or other kind of reward. This obviously does not include a legally prescribed benefit or reward.47 In other words, the employee must not be in it for the money, but rather with the altruistic motivation of exposing perpetrators of maleficence in the interest of society and/or victims of such unlawful conduct.

[69]    Once it has been established that the employee has made a disclosure of information which qualifies as a protected disclosure under the PDA, the next step is to then determine whether the employee has been visited with an occupational detriment by his or her employer as a result of or because of  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 34
making such a protected disclosure.48 This entails the application of a causation test. In TSB Sugar, supra,49 the court dealt with this consideration as follows:

". . . The phrase 'on account of' means 'owing to', 'by reason of' or 'because of the fact that'. The phrase is used to introduce the reason or explanation for something – for the purposes of the present discussion, the reason or explanation for the occupational detriment. The word 'partly' means 'not completely', 'not solely', 'not entirely' or 'not fully'. A finding that an employee was subjected to an occupational detriment on account of having made a protected disclosure will be based on a conclusion that the sole or predominant reason or explanation for the occupational detriment was the protected disclosure; whereas a finding that an employee was subjected to an occupational detriment partly on account of having made a protected disclosure will be to the effect that the protected disclosure was one of more than one reason for the occupational detriment.

Section 3 of the PDA thus casts the net wide. If there is more than one reason for a dismissal, the PDA will be contravened if any one of the reasons for the dismissal is the employee having made a protected disclosure. The wide scope of protection is consistent with the purposes of the PDA which addresses important constitutional values and injunctions regarding clean government and effective public service delivery. . . ."

[70]    The point is that once it is shown that the protected disclosure was the main reason why the employee was dismissed, it simply does not matter if the employee's dismissal may have been justified for other secondary reasons, as the employer is, by virtue of the provisions of section 187(1) of the LRA, prohibited from offering any other substantive defence to the dismissal. This was made clear in Baxter, supra,50 where the court said: 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 35
"Section 187(1) of the LRA lists reasons for which employees may not be dismissed (including making a protected disclosure under the PDA) and categorises such dismissals as automatically unfair. If it is proved that the employee was dismissed for any of the reasons specified in s 187(1) of the LRA, the employer cannot raise a defence based on the alleged fairness of the dismissal. The employer cannot claim that a dismissal for a proscribed reason was necessary for any other secondary reason, even if it can be argued that the dismissal was effected for a permissible reason related to the employee's conduct or capacity or the employer's operational requirements."

[71]    In determining whether the protected disclosure was the main reason for the dismissal of the employee, the well known causation test as enunciated in SA Chemical Workers Union and others v Afrox Ltd51 finds application. As held in Baxter, supra:52

". . . there may be different reasons for dismissing an employee and an employer is entitled to argue that the reason for the dismissal was not for a reason proscribed by s 187(1) of the LRA but for a fair reason based on incapacity or misconduct. The question will then trigger a causation enquiry. The essential enquiry is whether the reason for the dismissal is one proscribed by s 187(1) of the LRA, in this case the one in s 187(1)(h) of the LRA which proscribes the dismissal of an employee for making a protected disclosure . . ."

[72]    In simple terms, this causation test involves what is in essence a two-stage enquiry.53 The first part of the enquiry is to determine whether the dismissal of the employee would have taken place even if the employee did not make the protected disclosure, or in other words, the "but for" test. If the answer to this is yes, then the dismissal cannot be automatically unfair, because the necessary causation between the protected disclosure and the dismissal is absent. However, if the answer is no, then the second stage of the enquiry must be applied, being a determination whether the disclosure was the dominant, main, proximate or most likely cause of the dismissal.54 If the answer to this question is yes, then the dismissal would be automatically unfair, and if no, it would not.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 36

[73]    In sum, the enquiry into whether a particular disclosure qualifies as a protected disclosure under the PDA entails the following, as succinctly enunciated in TSB Sugar, supra55:

". . . the proper approach . . . is: first to determine whether the various disclosures of information constitute disclosures as defined in s 1 of the PDA; secondly, to decide if the disclosures are protected disclosures, as contemplated in s 1, read with s 6 of the PDA; and thirdly, whether Dorey was subjected to an occupational detriment (discipline and dismissal) by RCL on account, or partly on account, of having made a protected disclosure. The last enquiry requires careful consideration of the evidence regarding the reason for the dismissal to establish if the disclosure causally accounted or partly accounted for the dismissal."

The applicant (employee) party bears the evidentiary burden in this enquiry.56

Analysis

[74]    In applying the above legal principles in casu, it is common cause that the applicant made a disclosure styled as a protected disclosure with specific reference to the PDA, to his attorney, the FSB, and then copied this disclosure to his employer. Therefore, and in this case, both sections 6 and 9 of the PDA would find application, and need to be complied with for the disclosure to qualify as a protected disclosure. It must also be mentioned that the disclosure applied to both ARS and AAM, so when I refer to "the respondent" in this analysis, it must be considered to mean both these entities. I will still refer to AAM and ARS individually as such.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 37

[75]    First up for consideration is whether the information disclosed by the applicant in his disclosure qualified as a "disclosure" under the PDA. In my view it undoubtedly did. At the very least, it is information to the effect that the respondent has failed or is likely to fail to comply with a legal obligation the respondent is subject to, namely that it is dealing with or is likely to deal with client assets/funds without the mandate of such clients and/or failing to separate client funds from the respondent's own business funds or other funds.57 If this is true, that would be conduct prohibited, on the common cause facts, either by the FAIS Act or the FMA, depending on whether one looks at the transaction(s) as being conducted on behalf of ARS on the BDA platform in the JSE, or on behalf of AAM on the Saxo platform as a financial services provider.

[76]    With the applicant then having made a disclosure as contemplated by the PDA, the next question to answer is whether this disclosure by the applicant constitutes a protected disclosure. Deciding this requires, firstly, a determination as to whether the applicant reasonably believed that the information concerned was substantially true (since section 9 applies) and whether the applicant acted in good faith. It is in this context perhaps also appropriate to determine at the same time whether the applicant acted reasonably in making the disclosure to the FSB instead of only to his employer (the respondent), especially considering the Ethics Code that prescribed the reporting of any impropriety to the Deputy CEO.

[77]    The consideration of the proper context within which the applicant made his disclosure is essential. This context starts with the applicant's position. He was Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the whole Anglorand Group, with one of his core duties in his letter of appointment being ensuring compliance with regulatory provisions. He was also the key individual58 for AAM and as such accountable to the FSB for the conduct of AAM and its compliance with the regulatory provisions under the FAIS Act. He was further the representative of ARS on the JSE. All this considered, the applicant was well aware of what was  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 38
required by these regulatory provisions when dealing with the funds/assets of clients, and in my view acted accordingly.

[78]    The catalyst for all that happened in this case was the respondent's own operational and financial decision to effectively move its business out of trading on the JSE in the capacity of a broker on the JSE, which was far too expensive, and onto an alternative trading platform as a financial services provider, where the costs were far less. As summarised above, a significant obstacle to finally bringing about this move was the non-FICA clients, which was a historical problem in ARS, spanning many years into the past. Further, and although these non-FICA clients formed a small percentage (less than 10%) of the total ARS client base, the monetary value was significant, being in the region of R20.3 million.

[79]    Moving the assets of the non-FICA clients off the JSE trading platform and onto the new trading platform at Saxo was in the end a relatively easy task, using the process of negative novation set out above. The applicant testified that although he was not entirely happy with this process, he did not believe it was a serious situation of impropriety, because the non-FICA client assets would still remain intact and segregated, but would just be on another platform. In the end, it was common cause that the entire Exco, including the applicant and Carter, agreed to this negative novation. As a result, virtually all the clients of ARS, including the non-FICA clients, were moved to AAM and then onto Saxo by end November 2017.

[80]    However, and where it came to the non-FICA clients, that was unfortunately not the end of the tale. As Carter explained, the respondent was unable to finally separate itself from the JSE, despite the move of platform, without actually liquidating the investments (shares) of the non-FICA clients on the JSE. This exercise would not be necessary for the other clients. It is this difficulty that led to the meeting with the JSE on 13 November 2017, which the applicant was invited to and did attend. What the applicant took out of that meeting with the JSE, according to his testimony, was that the shares of the non-FICA clients could not be liquidated without getting actual mandates from them, meaning they had to be contacted. That belief appears consistent with  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 39
content of the subsequent email from Hutheram at the JSE to Carter on 15 November 2017.

[81]    I am convinced that the JSE never gave its stamp of approval to ARS to sell the shares of the non-FICA clients without their mandates, and what was said in Ma's instruction of 1 February 2018 is simply not correct. This is apparent from Carter's own, even if at times quite contradictory, testimony. He stated on the one hand that the JSE, even until long after the events with the applicant, could not provide him with a solution. That clearly contradicts any version that the JSE had earlier advised that it would be in order to sell the shares. Next, Carter took it on himself to try and contact all the non-FICA clients, expending, on his own testimony, considerable time and resources in doing so. This would of course all be unnecessary if the JSE advised that all the respondent needed to do was to simply sell the shares of the non-FICA clients. In fact, and in an email dated 25 January 2018 by Hutheram to Carter, in which Ma and the applicant was copied, Hutheram, inter alia, made it clear that in order for ARS to terminate its membership on the JSE, the clients must be provided with statements of their assets and funds, and informed to whom these assets or funds would be transferred in the absence of a specific mandate from the client, and that any funds must be then returned to the clients. Even in correspondence in April 2018 (which was after the applicant's suspension) with Hutheram, Ma and Carter were still asking the JSE for a "solution", and Hutheram maintained that a written mandate is required from a client to move funds into a third party account. And finally, it is clear that Carter was not able to get the mandates from these clients, because, again on his own testimony, getting a mandate would necessarily mean also doing FICA certification on the client, and this would in turn mean that the client could be withdrawn from the JSE without selling the shares, as was the case with all the other clients that did have FICA. All this shows that what the applicant was concerned about, and which was the subject matter of his disclosure, was true.

[82]    What is of concern is how the applicant was effectively sidelined following the meeting with the JSE on 13 November 2017. Even as Group COO and key individual for AAM, he was never copied in the correspondence between Carter and the JSE following the meeting with the JSE, which is surely to be expected, especially considering Carter's own testimony that he was not  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 40
actively involved in the business on a day-to-day basis at that time and the fact that the applicant was in the meeting with the JSE. Carter, as touched on above, also took the issue of dealing with the non-FICA clients away from the applicant, despite the applicant offering his assistance in this regard. And finally, Carter never reported to the applicant or to Exco as to any progress in obtaining mandates from the non-FICA clients, which could have kept the applicant properly informed. As the applicant testified, he was aware of only 13 non-FICA clients that had mandates.

[83]    The next the applicant knew of any dealings with the non-FICA clients was when he became aware, on 29 January 2018, that Carter had given instructions that all the shares of the non-FICA clients be traded (sold) on the Saxo platform. Again, the applicant was never consulted by Carter when he took that decision and gave that instruction. As far as the applicant was aware, this action was not permitted without the mandates of the non-FICA clients and these mandates had not been obtained. The applicant was aware of the pressing need on the part of the Carter and the shareholders of ARS to get out of the JSE, in essence at all costs. On 1 February 2018, the applicant reported these sales transactions to the external compliance officer (Julyan) of ARS for guidance, and she advised him to seek advice from the FSB, which he did before making the disclosure.

[84]    However, and what spurred the applicant into action was when, in the same meeting with Julyan, Higgins coincidentally came into the meeting and reported to him the instruction she had received from Ma to transfer the proceeds of the sales of the non-FICA clients' shares, firstly into ARS's ordinary business account and from there partly into Carter's attorneys firm trust account and partly into other accounts at the Bank of China. This was of great concern to the applicant, because it would contravene the fundamental requirement of the segregation of client funds and having proper control over those client funds. As far as the applicant was concerned, and as discussed above, the JSE never suggested such an approach as referred to by Ma in her instruction as shown to the applicant by Higgins. What is also worthy of mention is that once again, the applicant as COO was not in any manner copied in this instruction from Ma. At face value, and what was known to the applicant on 5 February 2018 when he made his disclosure, something was  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 41
clearly amiss, and this reasonably justified him making the disclosure and call for an investigation by the FSB, which the FSB actually advised he should do.59

[85]    In his testimony, Carter conceded that transferring the non-FICA client funds into ARS's operating account would contravene the principle of segregation of client funds. He also conceded that it was not permissible to trade the shares of clients without their mandate. This accords with the same understanding the applicant had of the applicable regulatory provisions.

[86]    It is true that on the following Monday, 5 February 2018, Carter informed Ma not to transfer the funds. But Ma appeared to be quite insistent, asking if at least the funds could be moved into ARS's operating account, to which Carter answered that it can be done, but not be paid out as yet (this communication will be dealt with further below). Once again, the applicant is excluded from all this communication. Further, and when this exchange happened, the applicant had already made his disclosure, stopped any transfer of funds from the Saxo platform, and was certainly not aware of this further email exchange between Carter and Ma.

[87]    I am satisfied that what the applicant was witnessing in the period between 29 January and 1 February 2018, from his reasonable perspective, was the committing of impropriety in contravention of the FAIS Act and its regulatory provisions. There can be no doubt that the information on which he based this belief was substantially true. The reasonableness of this belief is further cemented by the fact that he knew the JSE was of the view that the shares could only be sold in terms of client mandates which did not exist, and that the JSE had never even intimated that the proceeds of the sale of the shares be dealt with as instructed by Ma, which knowledge is once again in accordance with the true facts. The fact that he was purposefully excluded from all dealings with regard to the non-FICA clients after November 2017, when there was no feasible reason for that to have been the case, did not help matters. It is undeniably true that taking the proceeds of the share sales and placing the same into ARS's business account violated the rule against the segregation of client funds. In sum, and as matters existed until 5 February 2018 when the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 42
applicant made his disclosure, the information conveyed in his disclosure was actually true, let alone that he had a reasonable belief that it was substantially true. It can thus be said that he was correct in reporting his belief of impropriety, as there was substance in it.60

[88]    In my view, Carter was very much alive to the fact that the applicant had a legitimate cause of concern, especially where it came to the instruction by Ma of 1 February 2018. This is evident from his contrived testimony about this instruction, when he stated that this was never an instruction, but only a "suggestion" and still needed to be discussed. This testimony is clearly not true. It flies in the face of the fact that the instruction by Ma of 1 February 2018 is directed squarely at Higgins, stating that this "is what we will do, per JSE suggestion". This testimony of Carter also contradicts what is contained in the responses by Fluxmans on 8 March 2018 to the FSB and to the applicant, in which is it pertinently stated that Ma gave an instruction on 1 February 2018, however it is contended it was a legitimate instruction because the JSE approved of it.

[89]    I even have doubts about whether the email exchange between Carter and Ma on 5 February 2018 resolved the impropriety. Carter in testimony tried to ascribe meaning to the words he used in his emails on that date, which testimony appears incompatible with what is actually written by him. In my view, and properly construed, Carter agreed with Ma that the funds be transferred from the segregated client accounts on the Saxo platform into the respondent's business account, and only contradicted Ma by stating that the funds could not be paid out to the other two other accounts (being his trust account and the Bank of China accounts) "as yet". Two points must be made from this. First, the transfer to the respondent's business account is still an impropriety. Second, the phrase "as yet" in my view clearly means this transfer into the other accounts was still on the cards, but just not at this time, making it likely that it could happen in the future.

[90]    Carter was equally alive to the issue that the sale of shares without a mandate was an impropriety. The fact is that, as the applicant reasonably appreciated, the shares of the non-FICA clients was sold on the Saxo platform without their  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 43
mandate. In my view, it is like selling someone else's property without their permission. Carter sought to cater for this anomaly by testifying that a record would be kept of all the shares these clients had held, recording the value of the same as at the date of sale, and should the client come back in the future, that client would be imbursed to the true value of the share at the time of the enquiry by the client and not when it was sold. I find this explanation contrived. If this was the plan, this record would have been created before the shares were sold. No such record was placed before me. In any event, the first time this version came up was in Carter's testimony and this purported "plan" was never raised in the plethora of earlier correspondence about this issue.

[91]    In deciding whether a belief is reasonable, the assessment of the applicant's bona fides is obviously important. Again, I have little hesitation in accepting that the applicant at all times acted bona fide. He was justified in believing that the information he disclosed to the FSB was substantially true, especially considering that this assessment must be on the facts as it existed when the disclosure was made, being 5 February 2018. At the time when the disclosure was made, the applicant was not subject to any kind of disciplinary or performance processes which may be contended caused him to do this out of spite or retribution. There was nothing to suggest that the applicant was doing anything else but to discharge what was expected of him as a key individual under the FAIS Act.

[92]    The respondent tried hard to ascribe an ulterior motive and mala fides to the conduct of the applicant. To paraphrase, Carter called him some kind of "lone ranger" who was out on his own mission to cause the respondent harm. In this context, much was also made of a statement made by the applicant in the disciplinary hearing that he "panicked" when he became aware of the information, thereby suggesting that his actions could not have been bona fide. I have serious doubts about these contentions of the respondent. The applicant sought competent advice on what to do when he became appraised of the information, and was advised to report what happened to the FSB by an independent third-party compliance officer. In turn, the FSB advised him to make a statement and stop the transfer. The applicant's disclosure was clearly not some spur of the moment thing, done in panic. And considering the applicant was part of Exco and had been actively involved in the migration of  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 44
all the ARS clients into AAM and onto the Saxo platform, which process he himself accepted, there would be no reason for the applicant to embark on some kind of crusade to cause the respondent harm. I am convinced that the motivation of the applicant in doing what he did was to protect the interests of the clients by ensuring compliance with the relevant regulatory provisions, which is something he as key individual and in terms of his job description as COO was compelled to do.61

[93]    In fact, the difficulty caused by the conduct embarked upon by Carter in this case in selling the shares without a mandate is evidenced by one actual example provided by the applicant, being the case of one Daniel Turtledove (Turtledove), one of the non-FICA clients. In the case of Turtledove, he in fact responded on 31 January 2018 to the FICA approach made to him, enquiring about his shares and dividends earned from the shares, asking for it to be deposited into his account. This resulted in Higgins asking Carter what to do about this, as his shares had been sold, a fact which Turtledove was obviously unaware of. There was no indication of how Carter solved this problem.

[94]    But even if some kind of malice or ulterior motive can be attributed to the applicant, this still does not assist the respondent. Where the information disclosed is actually true, which I believe was the case in this instance, then the issue of a motive becomes largely irrelevant. In any event, it is undeniable that what the applicant did was in the interest of the clients, and even if he was motivated by some desire to flex his muscles and show his power towards the respondent (and Carter and Ma for that matter) where it came to pressing home what he personally believed constituted compliance with regulatory provisions, that motivation is insufficient, in line with the above legal principles, to dispel bona fides to the extent that protection under the PDA is lost. There was no evidence of any kind of antagonistic relationship between the applicant, Carter and/or Ma, prior to the disclosure being made. To the contrary, the evidence showed that all of them worked well together, an issue Carter himself was at pains to emphasise. Accordingly, no mala fides can be ascribed to the applicant of any sufficient magnitude so as to negate good faith in order to cause the applicant not to qualify for protection under the PDA.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 45

[95]    What is it that the applicant wanted when making his disclosure? All that he wanted is for the instruction of Ma relating to the clients' funds be stopped. It was obviously too late to stop the shares from being sold, since that event had come and gone. In this context, the applicant not only made the disclosure, but he also instructed Johnson from Saxo not to transfer the client funds out of the individual non-FICA client accounts without his approval. This considered, the disclosure made to the FSB makes sense. It will be easy, as will be further discussed below, for Carter and/or Ma as CEO and Deputy CEO respectively, to bypass this instruction of the applicant to Saxo and remove him from the funds transfer approval register,62 which in turn again opens the door for the transfer of funds to proceed. However, and where the FSB is brought into the picture, this will clearly not be so easy, since the issue is now with the responsible Regulator, which would logically go a long way towards securing the clients' funds. In the end, the FSB did intervene and actually recorded that transferring these funds without a client mandate was not acceptable.

[96]    It has to follow from all the above that the applicant satisfied the further requirement for his disclosure to qualify as being protected under the PDA, being the existence of a reasonable belief that the information disclosed was substantially true.

[97]    The next requirement to consider is whether the applicant made the disclosure for personal gain. There was no suggestion by the respondent that this was the case. On the facts, the applicant received no benefit or advantage for making the disclosure. He did what he did only to stop the transfer of client funds which transfer he believed was in contravention of regulatory provisions. Simply put, there was nothing in it for him to make the disclosures, other than doing what he was legally required to do and what he reasonably thought was the right thing to do.63 It is thus my view that this requirement for a protected disclosure under section 9 of the PDA has thus also been satisfied.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 46

[98]    Proceeding with the next step in the sequence of considerations, did at least one of the conditions in section 9(2) of the PDA apply? In his disclosure itself the applicant sought to rely on all four of them. It is however not necessary for the applicant to establish that all of these conditions apply. If it is found that one of them apply, it will suffice to establish compliance with section 9. I therefore do not intend to deal with all four the requirements. I will only deal with two of them, which I believe can readily be established from the facts of this case.

[99]    First, and as contemplated by section 9(2)(a), did the applicant have reason to believe that he would be subjected to an occupational detriment if he made the disclosure to his employer? In this regard, and contrary to what the respondent suggested, this is not only limited to a belief that he will be dismissed. The concept of "occupational detriment" as defined in the section 1 of the PDA includes demotion, suspension, harassment, intimidation, transfer of position, alteration of a term or conditions of employment to the disadvantage of the employee, being denied appointment to a position or office, being adversely affected in the employee's employment, or even being threatened with any of these kinds of conduct. Thus, and broadly speaking, what must be considered is whether the applicant had "reason to believe" that he would be adversely affected if he made the disclosure to Ma (being the Deputy CEO), as prescribed by the Ethics Code.

[100]    It is my view that the applicant had proper reason to believe that he would be subjected to an occupational detriment if he made the disclosure to Ma. In his disclosure, he stated that "I am concerned that when Geoffrey Carter and Monica Ma attempt to move the funds and realise that I have blocked this move by my instruction to Saxo, they will resort to taking actions that will cause me occupational detriment . . .". This belief is founded on a number of facts, as set out in the applicant's disclosure document and as established by the evidence summarised above. First, the JSE did not support the transfer of the funds to third-party accounts despite it being stated by Ma in her instruction that this was the case, meaning that it was highly likely to incur her wrath if the applicant took her to task in a disclosure made by him to her. Second, the applicant was in essence excluded from all dealings with the non-FICA clients after the meeting with the JSE in November 2017, when he at the  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 47
very least, in his capacity as COO and key individual, should have been included. Third, the shares of the non-FICA clients were already sold on instructions of Carter without proper mandates in place, and without any input from or consultation with the applicant, which will certainly cause an adverse reaction from Carter if the applicant complained about it, since it could not be remedied. Fourth, the instruction by Ma to transfer the funds was copied to all the senior management, but not the applicant, suggesting Ma did not want him involved. And finally, the applicant immediately moved to block the transfer, which Ma and/or Carter would obviously realise in the immediate future. All these factors considered, along with the fact that the applicant made the disclosure to support his conduct of blocking the transfer of non-FICA client funds, he was justified in believing that he would be subjected to an occupational detriment if he made the disclosure to the respondent. Hindsight certainly shows that his belief was justified, considering that shortly after the disclosure he was booted off Exco, stripped of his position as COO and all of his transactional authorities, forced to resign all his director positions, for the first time accused of poor performance, and then disciplined and dismissed. I have little hesitation in finding that section 9(2)(a) of the PDA applies.

[101]    Next, I would like to touch on section 9(2)(d), being the requirement that the impropriety was of an exceptionally serious nature. This concern was actually highlighted by the applicant in his disclosure. He recorded that: "I deem the impropriety detailed below to be of exceptionally serious nature as it relates to the handling of the funds of 135 clients totalling 20.3m (twenty point three million rand). These funds have been entrusted ARFSG and I believe it is clear that ARFSG's most senior management have embarked upon a plan that contravenes the most basic guidelines of segregating funds as detailed in the FMA." When the applicant made this statement, what he had was an instruction by Ma that required the client funds to be moved into ARS's business account and then into other accounts, without any segregation of funds being maintained in this process. That would, considered at the time, lead directly to clients' funds being co-mixed with ARS funds and would also take the funds out of the control of AAM which was now the service provider to these clients by virtue of the migration onto the Saxo platform. This all would  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 48
happen without the knowledge of the clients themselves. I have little hesitation in accepting that this illustrates exceptionally serious impropriety.

[102]    Therefore, the applicant has successfully shown that the conditions as contemplated by section 9(2)(a) and 9(2)(b) of the PDA have been met, thereby satisfying this further requirement for his disclosure to qualify as being protected under the PDA.

[103]    This leaves only one last requirement, being whether it was reasonable to have made the disclosure in the first place. I believe that it is relating to this requirement where a large portion of the respondent's attack on the case of the applicant lay. According to the respondent, there was no need for the applicant to have made the disclosure to the FSB. Carter stressed that there was an open-door policy in place in the respondent, that he and the applicant had always worked well together and that the applicant could simply have come to himself or Ma to discuss the problem and it would have been resolved. Carter also contended that it was entirely inappropriate for the applicant not to have followed the prescribed method of reporting impropriety as stipulated in the Ethics Code. According to Carter, the applicant was off on his own mission to prejudice the respondent.

[104]    In assessing whether it was reasonable for the applicant to have made a disclosure to the FSB, this must be considered in the context of the specific business of both ARS and AAM. The undeniable fact is that all the clients of ARS were taken practically off the JSE and into AAM in the financial services sector, by November 2017. This brings the FAIS Act into play for all transactions relating to these clients going forward, and with it, the regulatory provisions promulgated in terms thereof. Financial services providers are regulated by the FSB and the General Code of Conduct for Authorised Financial Services Providers and Representatives (the FSB Code).64 The FSB Code imposes certain duties on the Group (through AAM as its subsidiary), such as always acting in the interest of the clients,65 and that the service must be rendered in accordance with the contractual relationship and reasonable  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 49
requests or instructions of the client.66 The FSB Code also specifically prescribes that a separate account, designated to a specific client, must be opened and kept for all client funds which account can only obtain the funds of those clients, and all adequate steps must be taken to ensure that all client funds be safeguarded.67 Also of importance in casu, is that the financial services provider must take all reasonable steps to ensure that funds: ". . . are dealt with strictly in accordance with the mandate given to the provider . . ."68 And even insofar as it may be said that the FMA still applies, the FMA also specifically prescribes that client funds be segregated from the funds of the service provider, that any funds of a client must deposited into a specific client account, and that such funds may only be withdrawn to make payment to the person entitled to the payment or where legally allowed.69 All these regulatory provisions undoubtedly loom large in casu.

[105]    Even though the FSB was at the point in time when the applicant made the disclosure not on the list of approved bodies under section 8 of the PDA, it (or better put its successor-in-title) is now, and this cannot be ignored in making the assessment whether the disclosure to the FSB is reasonable. The point is that in assessing reasonableness in casu, this is not a disclosure made to a media house, journalist, internet blogger, or some or other third-party pressure group or NPO pursuing a particular agenda. It is a disclosure to a statutory body specifically tasked to monitor and enforce adherence to prescribed standards in the financial services industry in the interest of the public being serviced. I venture to say that a disclosure to an institution such as the FSB would tend to show that making the disclosure is reasonable, as contemplated by section 9(1)(b)(ii) of the PDA.

[106]    In fact, the applicant as key individual is duty-bound to make disclosure to the FSB of any conduct that is considered to be contrary to the requirements of "honesty, integrity and good standing".70 This would include where a person  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 50
has breached a fiduciary duty or has demonstrated a lack of willingness to comply with regulatory requirements and standards.71 In his disclosure, the applicant specifically said that he on numerous occasions advised Carter and Ma that client funds must at all times be segregated, and that they had nonetheless demonstrated an unwillingness to comply with this. That would clearly be something the applicant as key individual would be obliged to disclose to the FSB of his own volition, and in such a disclosure would be compelled to provide all the information relating to the same, which is what he did.72 Even if the applicant can still be criticised for doing this and not limiting his disclosure only to Carter and/or Ma as representatives of his employer (the respondent), then the following dictum in TSB Sugar, supra, provides the appropriate answer:73

". . . While Dorey undoubtedly is open to criticism for the way she may have gone about things, the fact remains that she was a risk control officer and had in the course of carrying out her duties discovered significant irregularities posing risks to RCL and its employees. . . ."

[107]    As touched on above, the applicant's disclosure to the FSB had a purpose, and that purpose would serve to protect not only the interests of the clients of the respondent, but ultimately its businesses as well. The fact is that a contravention of the regulatory provisions relating to dealing with client assets only by way of a proper mandate from the clients, and keeping client funds segregated, could cause AAM to lose its licence as an authorised financial services provider and could expose it to possible damages claims from clients. The applicant had of his own accord at least stopped the transfer of funds by way of his instruction to Johnson at Saxo on 2 February 2018, but there was no guarantee that this would last. In terms of a resolution dated 5 December 2017, two of either the applicant, Higgins and/or Salma Geemooi (Geemooi), the CFO, was required to sign for any client payments (including transfers) on Saxo, but this could readily be changed by way of a new resolution. As it turned out, and on 12 March 2018, the applicant was removed as an  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 51
authorised person where it came to transfers of client funds on Saxo. Thus, and in the ordinary course, Ma and Carter would then be free to do as they pleased where it came to transferring those funds. But with the FSB having been brought into the picture by the applicant, and in fact conveying in no uncertain terms on 5 March 2018 to AAM that any transfer of client funds without a mandate and without maintaining segregation would be unlawful, the purpose the applicant had in mind for the disclosure to the FSB was achieved. This in my view is a legitimate purpose and adds to the reasonableness of the applicant having made the disclosure to the FSB.

[108]    But why did the applicant not just take Carter and Ma into his confidence and only make disclosure to them and trust they would work with him to remedy the cause of his complaints. The applicant did explain why not in his testimony. According to him, it was an imperative to Carter that the clients had to finally move off the JSE platform so ARS could terminate its JSE membership and every month this did not happen the losses in the Group compounded. I may add that Carter confirmed this in his own testimony. The non-FICA clients were squarely standing in the way of this objective happening. The only solution Carter could come up with was to sell the non-FICA client shares and move their funds out of the dedicated client accounts on the JSE. He clearly had no intention of abandoning this idea, and this is also evidenced by Ma's instruction of 1 February 2018. It is unlikely that making a disclosure to them would yield any other solution. It also cannot be ignored that the applicant was in effect sidelined where it came to dealing with any non-FICA client issues, and all that was done was done without his involvement or knowledge. The applicant's explanation, in my view, makes sense, and I believe that he was justified in being distrustful of a disclosure to Carter and Ma solving anything he was concerned about.

[109]    Although reasonableness where it comes to making disclosures must be assessed at the time when it was made, I simply cannot turn a blind eye to certain conduct of Carter even before the applicant was suspended. In dealing with the applicant after the applicant made the disclosure and explained to Carter why he made the disclosure, Carter even denied knowledge of the applicant being the COO of AAM, despite the Group announcement by Ma on  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 52
15 May 2017 that he was appointed as the COO "for Anglorand Financial Services Group". Carter demanded that the applicant resign all his directorships of the entities in the Group. He removed the applicant from Exco. And on 9 March 2018, before the applicant is even suspended or charged, Carter makes it clear that the trust relationship with the applicant is destroyed because of his "unlawful actions" and threatens "further actions to follow". This was followed on 12 March 2018 by the abolishment of the applicant's position as COO. My view is that this is an entirely unacceptable state of affairs.

[110]    Something must also be said about Carter's testimony on his purported successes in finding the non-FICA clients. In the applicant's disciplinary hearing, he intimated he found all of them. He repeated this in his testimony in Court. But then Carter contradicted himself when conceding most of these clients could not be found. If it was true that Carter found all the non-FICA clients, as discussed above, they would have been subjected to FICA at the same time and there would be no need to sell their shares or transfer their funds. Also, the following statement by Ma in correspondence to the JSE on 18 April 2018 is telling, where she says ARS: ". . . continue what we are doing and do our best to clean the left clients in our BDA." It is thus simply not true that the non-FICA clients were found, and Carter's untrue suggestion that this was the case can only lend support to the conclusion that it was reasonable for the applicant to have made a disclosure to the FSB.

[111]    Carter complained that the applicant's disclosure caused the respondent material reputational damage and harm, and destroyed the employment relationship and relationship of trust with the applicant. Even if this is so, it does not render the conduct of the applicant in making the disclosure unreasonable. This kind of consequence is undoubtedly most often the case where information concerning impropriety by an employer is brought out into the open by one of its employees. As discussed above, to then strip the disclosure from protection because of what the employer perceived it caused to the trust relationship, and that the employer may look tarnished to third parties, would undermine the very purpose the PDA is designed to achieve. This complaint by Carter thus cannot assist the respondent. And finally in this regard, a consideration of the documentary evidence shows that in the course of 2017, there were a number of examples of the FSB writing to AAM with  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 53
regard to failures to comply with the financial soundness requirements in order to be an FSP under the FAIS Act, none of which was due to any failure on the part of the applicant.

[112]    It is so that the Ethics Code prescribed that the applicant was obliged to make a disclosure of impropriety to the Deputy CEO, which in this case was Ma. According to the applicant, he could not make the disclosure to Ma, as she as one of the main actors in his cause of complaint, thus disqualifying her from receiving the complaint and then leaving no other prescribed internal office to which to make the disclosure. Whilst I accept that making the disclosure to Ma in terms of the Ethics Code does not mean that Ma is going to be the one that deals with it, and that Ma is not necessarily disqualified from receiving the disclosure even if she is involved, I understand the applicant's thinking. The point is that it is not about whether the applicant was right or wrong in how he interpreted the application of the Ethics Code. It is about whether his conduct was reasonable. Considering that Ma and Carter were acting in collaboration and were as high up in the respondent as one can get, the applicant in my view was not acting unreasonably when he believed he could not make the disclosure to them. But nonetheless, the applicant did not act in a clandestine manner in making the disclosure to the FSB, as he at the same time copied both Carter and Ma, making his actions well known to all involved.74 In addition, and in an email sent to Carter and Ma also on 5 February 2018, the applicant gave simple point by point statements as to why he had difficulty in authorising the transfer of funds of the non-FICA clients to the ARS operating account, which did not even solicit a response from them. Finally, even if it can be said that the applicant erred and it was overzealous conduct on his part in making the disclosure to the FSB, that does not detract from the fact that what the applicant did was still legitimate because the information he disclosed was correct (true). As said in TSB Sugar, supra:75

"The fact that Dorey may have been over-zealous in her disclosures about the SHE statistics and the clinic registers, and was not able to sufficiently substantiate her concerns in that regard, does not detract from the legitimacy of the course she pursued with regard especially to the Lubisi and Shabangu  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 54
incidents. These disclosures were not inaccurate or false; they were correct. . . ."

[113]    As stated above, section 9(3) sets out individual considerations to be taken into account when deciding whether making the disclosure was reasonable. Applying these to the above facts, and firstly, the disclosure to the FSB was made to a particular person (body) to whom such a disclosure would ordinarily be reasonable. Secondly, the alleged impropriety was undoubtedly extremely serious. Thirdly, and considering the purpose of the disclosure, it was likely that the impropriety would come to pass in the future if intervention by the FSB did not happen. And finally, the public interest would be served by the disclosure, considering that the individual non-FICA clients would not even know what was happening. In all of the above circumstances, I am satisfied that in making the disclosure to the FSB, in the manner that he did, the applicant acted reasonably in the particular circumstances. As such, the requirements of section 9(1)(b)(ii) of the PDA have been satisfied.

[114]    In sum, I conclude that the disclosure made by the applicant to the FSB on 5 February 2018, as copied to both Carter and Ma, constituted a proper and legitimate protected disclosure as contemplated by the PDA. The information disclosed qualified as information contemplated by the PDA in section 1(1) thereof. The disclosure was made in circumstances where the applicant reasonably believed the information was substantially true (the information disclosed was in fact true). The applicant's conduct in making the disclosure was in good faith, and pursuant to what he saw as his obligations under the relevant applicable regulatory provisions. And finally, when applying section 9(1), the applicant has satisfied the conditions in sections 9(2)(a) and (d), the applicant obtained no benefit from the disclosure, and it was reasonable to have made the disclosure in the first place. The following dictum from the judgment in City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality v Engineering Council of SA and another76, where the court accepted a protected disclosure had been made by the employee, can equally be applied to the conduct of the applicant in casu: 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 55
"The effect of these provisions is that the disclosure would be protected if Mr Weyers acted in good faith; reasonably believed that the information disclosed and the allegations made by him were substantially true; was not acting for personal gain and one or other of the conditions in s 9(2)(c) and (d) was satisfied. Mr Pauw rightly conceded that the first three requirements were satisfied. In the light of the evidence summarized earlier in this judgment he could do no less. It is plain that Mr Weyers was throughout painfully aware of his professional responsibilities and of the need to provide residents of Tshwane with a safe and reliable electricity supply. His concern about the dangers arising from appointing people who, after testing, he regarded as insufficiently skilled to undertake the onerous duties attaching to a system operator position shines through each document. His bona fides and his belief in the truth of what he was saying are apparent. As this case shows he made the disclosure at considerable personal cost and not for personal gain. He acted in the discharge of what he conceived, and had been advised, was his professional duty. The disclosure was made to parties that would manifestly be interested in such disclosure. . . ."

[115]    What now remains is to decide whether the applicant was dismissed by the respondent as a result of making such protected disclosure. I must immediately say that for the reasons to follow, I have little doubt that this was indeed the case.

[116]    Firstly, and when applying the "but for" first part of the causation test, it can easily be said that if it was not for making the disclosure, the applicant would never have been disciplined, let alone dismissed. What the email correspondence in this matter shows is that prior to the applicant's disclosure landing on Carter's email and desk, there is not one iota of complaint about the conduct or performance of the applicant in fulfilling his duties as COO at the respondent. In fact, he was specifically tasked to become the key individual of AAM and had to get qualified for this position. He was the responsible representative party for ARS on the JSE as well. He had recently been promoted to the COO of the whole Group. All would never have happened if Carter and/or Ma had a problem with his performance or conduct.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 56

[117]    But after 5 February 2018, things change dramatically. Within a few weeks, it is demanded that he resign as director from all the entities in the Group. He is unilaterally removed from Exco. His position as COO is abolished. He is also removed as authorised signatory on all client transactions on the Saxo platform. And for the first time, it is now said that he did not properly perform his duties as COO. Undeniably, his fate was already sealed at this point in time, and the only cause thereof could have been the protected disclosure he had made, as he was not even charged with any misconduct at this time.

[118]    What in my view is telling is Carter's own testimony about what happened after he received the disclosure. He did not seek to engage the applicant to discuss it with him, and see if perhaps the two of them could not achieve common ground and the approach the FSB accordingly. Instead, he ignored the disclosure for a week or so, and then decided to approach Fluxmans about it. It is not lost on me that in his testimony, Carter deliberately tried to avoid the suggestion that he consulted Fluxmans about the disclosure, instead saying that what the applicant had said in the disclosure had belittled, insulted and defamed Ma, and that he was merely accompanying her to Fluxmans in some kind of supporting role so this could be dealt with. However, and when Fluxmans acted on what they were obviously instructed to do, it is not about defamation against Ma only. Rather, it is a letter of demand sent on 8 March 2018 on behalf of both Carter and Ma, in which the issue of the disclosure is pertinently dealt with. I have little doubt that Carter and Ma went to consult Fluxmans about what action could be taken against the applicant because of the disclosure.

[119]    There is however a piece of evidence by Carter that in my view goes a long way towards showing that but for the disclosure, the applicant would never have been disciplined. Carter testified that when he consulted Fluxmans about the disclosure, he was asked why did he not dismiss the applicant. It is in the context of this discussion that Carter was asked by Fluxmans to collect "evidence" and then provide it to Fluxmans, which in my view was a deliberate stratagem to bring about the dismissal of the applicant. When Carter brought Fluxmans this "evidence", they drafted the suspension notice, charge sheet, briefed the counsel that acted as chairperson, and slipped in the protected  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 57
disclosure amongst the plethora of other charges they came up with. In this context, the following dictum from Baxter, supra, rings true in casu:77

". . . From the evidence viewed overall, therefore, it may reasonably be inferred that the appellant would not have been dismissed but for the disclosures he made. Most of the charges were a fig leaf covering the true reason for dismissal: the protected disclosures . . ."

[120]    Therefore, there is a direct temporal nexus between the protected disclosure, and the applicant being charged with misconduct for the first time ever in a career at the respondent spanning almost a decade.78 All the other misconduct charges were formulated on the back of an initial complaint by the respondent about the protected disclosure and what could be done against the applicant for doing this. Carter and Ma no doubt took serious umbrage at the applicant for making the disclosure and about what it contained, to the extent of consulting attorneys about it, sending a letter of demand to the applicant, and being advised to bring about the dismissal of the applicant for it. And added to this, by the time the applicant was finally charged, his position as COO was already abolished, he was removed as director and from being on Exco, and he was stripped of all his transactional powers. His fate was effectively already sealed. The disclosure was thus the catalyst for all that happened to the applicant. The "but for" question must be answered in favour of the applicant.

[121]    Finally, was the protected disclosure the main, dominant or proximate cause of the dismissal of the applicant, considering all the other misconduct charges. Deciding this question does entail that the substance of the other charges must be considered. Obviously, it is not for this Court to decide if a dismissal based on the other misconduct charges would be substantively fair, as only the CCMA has that jurisdiction. The assessment of the substance of the other misconduct charges is done only in the context of deciding, and putting it as simply as possible, what was the most important reason for the applicant being dismissed.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 58

[122]    In answering this question, something must first be said about how the other misconduct charges were dealt with in evidence. Where it came to the applicant, his Counsel painstakingly took the applicant through each and every charge, for him to testify on the substance thereof. The applicant was hardly cross-examined on this testimony. Where it came to the respondent's testimony, Carter had very little to say, except using gratuitous general statements when describing the applicant's performance as COO, which included saying that the appellant was the most useless COO he had ever seen. This kind of testimony does not assist the respondent's case, especially considering that when it came to Carter being asked to comment on the substance of the charges, he deferred to Ma, saying Ma would testify about it, considering he lived in Cape Town, and was not actively involved in the day-to-day operations and running of the business. But then, and despite Ma being available to testify, she is not called to testify, which surely must lead to a negative inference being drawn concerning the veracity of the respondent's case on the other misconduct charges. As said in ABSA Investment Management Services (Pty) Ltd v Crowhurst79:

". . . it is long established that the failure of a party to call an available witness may found an adverse inference, the inference being that the witness will not support – and may even damage – that party's case. Compare Zeffertt et al SA Law of Evidence (5ed) at 128–30."

[123]    Carter sought to only defer to the transcript of the disciplinary hearing to substantiate the respondent's case on the misconduct charges, comprised in two level arch files. I find this approach unacceptable. What the respondent is in fact suggesting is that I should trawl through two lever arch files and then, by comparing what is contained therein with the outcome of the disciplinary hearing, determine for myself if the other misconduct charges have greater substance than the charge relating to the disclosure. It is not for this Court to prove the respondent's case. It should do this itself, especially considering that the applicant led detailed testimony in Court about all the charges. This is also  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 59
not a review application, where one can refer to the record (transcript) to determine the evidence before the arbitrator when comparing what was before the arbitrator to his or her award.

[124]    In any event, the disciplinary hearing transcripts were never admitted as uncontested evidence. In terms of paragraph 8.1 of the pretrial minute it is agreed that documents would serve as evidence of what they purport to be without admitting that the contents thereof are correct. As a result, it was never agreed that the content of the transcript of the disciplinary hearing would serve as undisputed evidence of the misconduct with which the applicant has been charged. It was thus necessary for the respondent to at least substantiate the misconduct charges by way of testimony by a witness or witnesses. As said in Baxter, supra:80

"Although the findings of the disciplinary enquiry and the witness statements form part of the discovered documents, it was agreed in the pretrial minute that, while the documents were what they purported to be, the truth of their contents was not admitted and if the respondents wished to rely on such evidence the relevant witnesses would need to testify."

[125]    And finally in this regard, insofar as the testimony of the applicant concerning the misconduct charges is contradicted by any of the testimony presented by Carter, I have little hesitation in preferring the evidence of the applicant. Although Carter initially impressed me as a witness when he testified, my view in this regard swiftly dissipated as his testimony continued, and especially when he was cross-examined. Carter was extremely argumentative and condescending in his testimony and avoided answering questions that he did not like the answers to. He often clearly anticipated what the applicant's Counsel was heading towards when being cross-examined, and he adapted his answers accordingly. He was unwilling to make obvious concessions. In Ehlers v Bohler Uddeholm Africa (Pty) Ltd81 the court held that a witness that was argumentative and constantly asked for questions to be repeated was not credible. In Ngozo and others v Scorpion Legal Protection82 the court equally had regard to a witness being argumentative, but then also considered the fact  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 60
that the witness would pose questions back at the respondent's counsel and was evasive in answering a number of critical questions, in rejecting the testimony of the witness. In Hlongwane v Cisco Systems SA and another83 the court held as follows in rejecting the entire evidence of the applicant in that case, which in my view is mostly quite descriptive of the testimony of Carter in casu:

"The applicant was, with due respect to him, a profoundly poor witness to say the least. It would appear he came into the witness stand having considered and strategized as to what his testimony was going to be irrespective of what questions would be put to him. His strategy seems to have been that the truth was only that which favoured his case and that he would not change his stand irrespective of questions or versions put to him. His strategic approach was to deal with difficult questions or those whose underlying purpose was to seek to undermine his case by bringing in some points unrelated to the questions. He was indeed a man loyal to his strategy but at times seems to have failed to understand the difference between strategy and tactics. He is a man not to be trusted with the truth and thus anything in his version that purports to be the truth has to be evaluated against all probabilities before it can be accepted as such. As I listened and observed his mannerisms in the witness stand, I wondered whether he seriously believed in his own story. He frequently laughed when questioned during cross-examination, something he did not do much of, if at all, during evidence-in-chief or re-examination.

It was also apparent during cross-examination that the applicant evaluated every question put to him with a view to determining the underlying purpose before he could answer. . . ."

[126]    As opposed to Carter, the applicant fared far better in evidence. He was not argumentative. Although he was on occasion long-winded and over-elaborated when all he was required to give was simple answers, this in my view did not materially detract from his credibility. He was willing to make concessions where required. He struck me as honest, and the bulk of what he testified to was actually substantiated by the documentary evidence.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 61

[127]    The above being said, I will now evaluate the other misconduct charges against the applicant. I do not intend to deal with each and every single charge in detail, and will suffice with making certain pertinent comments, set out below. The applicant was suspended on 19 March 2018 and ultimately charged on 1 May 2018. What is immediately apparent from the notice to attend the disciplinary hearing is that most of the charges relate to alleged misconduct only in the period of January, February and March 2018, showing the strong temporal nexus to the disclosure made on 5 February 2018.84

[128]    Several of the charges against the applicant also related to issues of performance, and not misconduct, in circumstances where the applicant was never subjected to any poor performance incapacity process, a fact which Carter ultimately conceded. These would be the charges relating to his alleged failure to achieve his KPA's, the manner in which he generally dealt with his superiors and other employees, that he failed to adequately carry out his duties as COO, and that he had failed to adequately perform his duties in general. Importantly, the first time anything was said about the applicant's alleged lack of performance was only on 9 March 2018. In the absence of a proper process as contemplated by items 8(2), (3) and (4), and item 9, of Schedule 8 of the LRA, dismissal on these issues would never be competent. This process did not happen. It is clear to me that these charges were contrived in the exercise conducted by Fluxmans in formulating the charge sheet against the applicant, designed to attempt to justify his dismissal on other grounds.

[129]    Three of the charges against the applicant were either simply spurious or completely lacked substance. These are the charges relating to the applicant's alleged failures in the Investec dispute resulting in legal costs of some R27 million, the fact that the applicant "actively and consciously" resisted the decision by Exco to move from the JSE to the Saxo platform, and that he failed to deal with the "historical" non-FICA clients despite being instructed to do so. Dealing firstly with the Saxo platform migration charge, it is clear that on the evidence, the applicant never resisted the move to the Saxo platform. He  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 62
was very much involved in finding a service provider once the decision was made to move platform. Once the decision was taken at Exco to perform the transition using a negative novation, the applicant was all for it, and the transition happened in a few months and was virtually completed by November 2017. In cases where clients protested (and these were not non-FICA clients) the applicant dealt with them. Next, and with regard to the Investec dispute charge, not only was the applicant not involved in it and the incurring of any legal costs, but it dated back to 2010. And lastly, on the issue of the applicant's alleged failure to comply with an alleged instruction to deal with the historical non-FICA clients, there was no such instruction at all. What emerged from the testimony is that the issue of non-FICA clients existed for several years and no one really bothered with it, until it became a live issue when the respondent wanted to move out of the JSE. There was thus never any merit in any of these three charges.

[130]    Lastly, there were a number of charges pertaining to the applicant allegedly repeatedly failing and/refusing to carry out tasks allocated to him and with instructions from the CEO and Deputy CEO. The applicant, in his evidence, provided a satisfactory answer to all of these charges.85 Some of the charges were trivial, such as charges relating to not signing a service contact with a service provider,86 not informing clients of a deadline for moving off the BDA system, not drafting a disclaimer for the Saxo platform, and not concluding an employment agreement.87 There was even a charge levelled against the applicant with regard to the capital adequacy issues in AAM, which difficulties the applicant was not responsible for, has absolutely no power or competence to remedy (it could only be remedied by the shareholders), and which, on the documentary evidence, already existed long before the applicant as appointed as COO. A conspectus of the documentary evidence shows that it was in fact Geemooi, the CFO, that was responsible for capital adequacy issues, and not the applicant.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 63

[131]    Once the above is considered, one remaining charge looms large. It was a charge in my view already intimated long before the disciplinary action against the applicant was even instituted. This charge reads: "you have vindictively and maliciously made a 'protected disclosure' to the detriment of the company and the Group and to shareholders, which disclosure is without merit." The fact that the applicant was even charged with this issue in such manner, when it is alleged by the respondent that the protected disclosure has little to do with the decision to ultimately dismiss the applicant, is difficult to understand, and could not be properly explained by Carter. The applicant should never have been charged with such a charge. But what happened, in my view, is that Carter and Ma went to Fluxmans about the protected disclosure and what it contained, where it was suggested to them that the applicant be dismissed for it, and this was followed by the collecting of so-called "evidence" which then only led to the formulation of all the other charges. I have very little hesitation in accepting that the main and principal charge against the applicant was the one relating to the protected disclosure, and that this charge was the main and proximate cause of his dismissal.

[132]    My view in this regard is supported by the manner in which the chairperson (Blacher) herself dealt with all the charges in her finding. Blacher never made any individual findings of guilt in respect of the individual misconduct charges. Rather, her finding contained the summary of evidence on the charges, coupled with statements about what the employee (applicant) did not prove, as if he carried the onus to prove his innocence. The individual charge to which Blacher devoted the most of her attention to in her finding was the charge relating to the protected disclosure. Her actual finding on the substance of all the misconduct charges is encompassed only in one paragraph, which reads: "The evidence clearly shows the Employee as an individual who acted on a whim or in a 'panic' and on the majority of the charges where he was given specific tasks he either failed to complete them or carried them out in a pedestrian manner or delegated the task. He also failed to deal with financial issues and find solutions when required . . .." The vagueness of the finding is in my view telling, in that it cannot substantiate that any of the other misconduct charges was the main and real reason for the applicant's dismissal. But even worse still, it shows that Blacher had no regard to whether the content of what  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 64
was contained in the applicant's disclosure was substantiated or true, which was critical considering that the charge specifically intimated the information in the disclosure was "without merit". In TSB Sugar, supra, the court held as follows, in support of finding that the employee was dismissed for making a protected disclosure:88

"Clearly Dorey's stance rankled with RCL. This is further evident in the findings of Terblanche, the chairperson of the appeal hearing. He was of the view that Dorey had no cause or justification to disclose her trepidations about irregularity. As far as he was concerned, she merely offered 'a build-up of incidents – unacceptable and highly destructive in terms of questioning all decisions etc and undermining authority' amounting to insubordination reflecting 'an element of intent'. He asked rhetorically:

'What was she trying to achieve – discredit? vindictive? – surely the incessant seeking of, in your mind, wrongful acts and omissions on the part of your superior does not reflect you trying to solve any perceived or real issues."

[133]    An even clearer answer can be found in how Blacher dealt with the issue of an appropriate sanction. In this regard she does appear to distinguish between the charge relating to the protected disclosure and what she calls "the 17 other charges". In considering sanction, her singular finding on the "17 other charges" is that the applicant ". . . behaved in an arrogant, devious manner . . .". But where it came to the protected disclosure charge, she finds: "The Employee is a COO, a shareholder and a KI and thus a senior staff member, was aware of the company Code of Conduct and Ethics as this attached to his affidavit, and could from the outset have taken measures to avoid what had ultimately brought this matter to the fore in terms of the Protected Disclosure. The Employee chose to act as a 'lone ranger' as described by the Employer, at times, when he should have been working in conjunction with others as part of his KI duties, he worked unilaterally without consideration for the Company and thus causing irreparable damage to the Company's reputation, exacerbating the act by bringing it into the public domain" (sic). This leaves me convinced that the principal and main reason why Blacher chose to  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 65
recommend the dismissal of the applicant was because of the protected disclosure. As held in TSB Sugar, supra:89

"However, Terblanche did not offer any analysis of whether the disclosures made by Dorey regarding Lubisi, Shabangu, the AIA accreditation and the certificates of fitness were accurate and true. He did not distinguish between the various disclosures. Instead, he made a blanket finding that because some of the disclosures were not substantiated Dorey had acted vindictively to discredit RCL. But for the disclosures, it is unlikely that Dorey would have been dismissed. Put differently, the disclosures materially contributed to her dismissal and were adequately connected to it."

[134]    It follows from the above that the applicant has satisfied the causation test. I find that his protected disclosure was the main and proximate cause for his dismissal. The other misconduct charges were in reality nothing else but camouflage, contrived after the fact to bring about some kind of other justification for the dismissal of the applicant. But in the end, even these charges lacked substance.

[135]    In conclusion: The applicant made a disclosure to the FSB on 5 February 2018, which qualifies as a protected disclosure in terms of the PDA in that all the requirements of sections 1(1), 6 and 9 of the PDA have been satisfied. The applicant was dismissed by the respondent as a result of having made this protected disclosure. The applicant's dismissal is thus automatically unfair as contemplated by section 187(1)(h) of the LRA.

Relief

[136]    In terms of his statement of claim and in the pretrial minute, the applicant has sought maximum compensation of 24 months' remuneration as contemplated by section 194(3) of the LRA, this being an automatic unfair dismissal. The applicant's monthly remuneration, as reflected on his payslip, amounts to R99 905,12.

 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 66

[137]    It is trite that when deciding on the quantum of compensation to be awarded, this Court exercises a discretion. This discretion was enunciated in Le Monde Luggage CC t/a Pakwells Petje v Dunn NO and others,90 as thus:

"The compensation which must be made to the wronged party is a payment to offset the financial loss which has resulted from a wrongful act. The primary enquiry for a court is to determine the extent of that loss, taking into account the nature of the unfair dismissal and hence the scope of the wrongful act on the part of the employer. This court has been careful to ensure that the purpose of the compensation is to make good the employee's loss and not to punish the employer."

[138]    However, and despite what is said in Le Monde Luggage, there is one critical difference where it comes to compensation in the case of an automatic unfair dismissal under the LRA, and other unfair dismissal cases. In the case of compensation awards for automatic unfair dismissals, the compensation cap is double that of other unfair dismissals, being a maximum of 24 months' remuneration instead of a maximum 12 months' remuneration. This confirms that from a statutory perspective, automatic unfair dismissals are seen in a much more serious light and as such carries with it a punitive component forming part of any compensation award.91 In Chemical Energy Paper Printing Wood and Allied Workers Union and another v Glass and Aluminium 2000 CC92 the court held as follows, referring to dismissals under section 187(1) of the LRA:

". . . A dismissal of an employee for any one of those reasons strikes at the essence of the values which form the foundations of our new democratic society as enunciated in the Constitution. It is a dismissal that undermines the fundamental values that the labour relations community in our country  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 67
depends on to regulate its very existence. Accordingly such a dismissal deserves to be dealt with in a manner that gives due weight to the seriousness of the unfairness to which the employee so dismissed has been subjected.

In considering whether or not to award compensation in such a case, the court must consider that not to award any compensation at all where reinstatement is also not awarded may give rise to the perception that dismissal for such a reason is being condoned. This may encourage other employers to do the same. It must also take into account the fact that such a dismissal is viewed as the most egregious under the Act. Accordingly, there must be a punitive element in the consideration of compensation . . ."

[139]    In Baxter, supra,93 the court added:

"An award of just and equitable compensation in lieu of reinstatement must take account of the appellant's lengthy service, his age and importantly our finding that the appellant suffered reprisal for making a protected disclosure when he should have been shielded from further impropriety. Employers who act inappropriately against whistleblowers should expect to be fittingly sanctioned . . ."

[140]    In casu, I consider that the applicant had close on 10 years of unblemished service with the respondent, in essence built his entire career in the respondent, and that his actions throughout were bona fide. I also consider the fact that the respondent took legal advice upon receiving the disclosure, and nonetheless sought to contrive a process and charges designed to get rid of the applicant for making the protected disclosure. The conduct of the respondent in this case was in my view inexcusable. Since this is an automatic unfair dismissal, the punitive element forming part of the compensation award cannot be ignored. There was no evidence of what effect a large compensation award may have on the business of the respondent. A message must also be sent to employers that these kinds of dismissals will not be tolerated and will attract appropriately harsh compensation awards. And finally, it must be considered that the applicant was only unemployed for about a month and a half, before finding suitable alternative employment, albeit at a  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 68
reduction in salary of about 40%.94 In all these circumstances, it is my view that a compensation award in an amount equivalent to 16 (sixteen) months' remuneration of the applicant would be fair and equitable.95 Considering the applicant's monthly remuneration of R99 905,12, this amounts to a total compensation award of R1 598 481,92 (one million five hundred and ninety-eight thousand four hundred and eighty-one rand ninety-two cents).

Costs

[141]    This then only leaves the issue of costs. In terms of section 162 of the LRA, I have a wide discretion where it comes to the issue of costs. In exercising this discretion, it must be considered that as a point of departure, it is now trite that in employment disputes under the LRA, costs are ordinarily not awarded.96 However, and in Union for Police Security and Corrections Organisation v SA Custodial Management (Pty) Ltd and others97 the court added the following, with reference to the general principle as aforesaid:

". . . Do the principles I have enunciated dictate that costs can never be ordered against a party in labour matters? I think it is clear from this Court's jurisprudence that the answer to this question is a resounding 'no'. This Court has previously affirmed the principle that costs are discretionary to the court adjudicating a matter. That applies no differently to labour matters. But, like all exercises of discretion, a court exercising its discretion to award costs must do so judicially.

In the labour context, the judicial exercise of a court's discretion to award costs requires, at the very least, that the court must do two things. First, it  
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 69
must give reasons for doing so and must account for its departure from the ordinary rule that costs should not be ordered. Second, it must apply its mind to the dictates of the fairness standard in section 162, and the constitutional and statutory imperatives that underpin it."

[142]    The applicant has asked for a punitive costs order. This prayer can immediately be disposed of, on the basis that there is no justification for such an order. However, what about ordinary costs? Does fairness dictate, in casu, that such an order is justified? I believe that it does. This is a case of an automatic unfair dismissal. That is the most egregious form of dismissal one can get. Added to that, it is a dismissal for making a protected disclosure. In line with the very objectives behind the PDA discussed above, a message must be sent to employers that a dismissal for a protected disclosure carries with it the most adverse of consequences, which would include having to pay costs. Further, employees must be encouraged to report impropriety, and this has to include being able to obtain some kind of recoupment of the legal costs they would have to expend to defend themselves when they are dismissed because of reporting such impropriety, meaning that the employee party should not be left out of pocket for having to challenge his or her dismissal for such a reason in court. There are certainly legal precedents for a costs award being justified in the case of an automatic unfair dismissal based on a protected disclosure.98 The conduct of the respondent in designing a stratagem to get of the applicant for making the protected disclosure is also worthy of censure in the form of a costs award.

[143]    Accordingly, and for the reasons set out above, I exercise my wide discretion where it comes to costs in favour of making a costs award against the respondent.

[144]    For all of the reasons as set out above, I make the following order: 
[2022] JOL 53958 (LC) at 70
Order

The applicant's dismissal by the respondent is declared to constitute an automatic unfair dismissal as contemplated by section 187(1)(h) of the LRA, the applicant having been dismissed for making a protected disclosure.
The respondent is ordered to pay compensation to the applicant in an amount of R1 598 481,92 (one million five hundred and ninety-eight thousand four hundred and eighty-one rand ninety-two cents), being an amount equivalent to 16 (sixteen) months' remuneration of the applicant.
The amount payable by the respondent to the applicant in terms of paragraph 2 of this order shall be paid within 10 (ten) days of date of handing down of this judgment, failing which it shall accrue interest at the legally prescribed rate from such date until date of payment.
The respondent is ordered to pay the applicant's costs.


Footnotes
1	 This quote has been often attributed to Edmund Burke, the 18th century Irish philosopher and politician. Recent research has opined that Burke did not actually say these words, but it was a paraphrase from a statement he had made.
2	 A utilitarian philosopher, who said these words at an inaugural address at the University of St Andrews in 1867.
3	(2007) 28 ILJ 195 (LC) at paras [166]–[167].
4	 In Tshishonga (id fn 3) at para [174], the court said: "Employees have insider information of wrongdoing and are usually first to detect it. Inherent in the jurisprudence is the acknowledgment that employees are vulnerable people. They are especially vulnerable because by disclosing information about the employer and other employees, conflicts arise with their duty of loyalty and confidence which exposes them to retaliation. . . ..".
5	 Act 26 of 2000 (as amended).
6	(2020) 41 ILJ 374 (LAC) at para [49] [also reported at [2020] 3 BLLR 257 (LAC) – Ed]. See also the remarks of the court in Potgieter v Tubatse Ferrochrome and others (2014) 35 ILJ 2419 (LAC) at para [15] as to the importance of giving full and proper effect to the PDA.
7	 See r 6(1).
8	 Act 66 of 1995 (as amended).
9	 In terms of s 187(1)(h) of the LRA, a dismissal is automatically unfair if the reason for the dismissal is: ". . . a contravention of the Protected Disclosure Act, 2000, by the employer on account of an employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.".
10	 This is done in terms of r 6(3).
11	 Act 37 of 2002.
12	 Act 19 of 2012.
13	 Palmer was one of the founders of the business.
14	 Act 38 of 2001.
15	 There were disputes with some individual clients who then did not want to move, but this has no relevance to the current case. It was agreed in Exco that the final deadline for the move to be completed would be 30 November 2017.
16	 The applicant was not copied into this email by Carter, despite the applicant being in the meeting of 13 November 2017.
17	 Higgins also did the Group finances, financial statements and reconciliations.
18	 The fact that Carter in evidence even disputed this was an instruction will be dealt with below.
19	 See s 3 of the PDA. An occupational detriment includes a dismissal of an employee. In terms of s 4(2) of the PDA: "For the purposes of the Labour Relations Act, 1995, including the consideration of any matter emanating from this Act by the Labour Court – (a) any dismissal in breach of section 3 is deemed to be an automatically unfair dismissal as contemplated in section 187 of that Act . . .".
20	 (2014) 35 ILJ 973 (LAC) at para [15].
21	 S 6(1)(a) reads: "Any disclosure made in good faith – (a) and substantially in accordance with any procedure authorised by the employee's or worker's employer for reporting or otherwise remedying the impropriety concerned and the employee or worker has been made aware of the procedure as required in terms of subsection (2)(a)(ii) . . . is a protected disclosure.".
22	 It may be paid that the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (the successor-in-title to the FSB) has been designated as such a body, in terms of GN R949 in GG 41904 of 14 September 2018, which is only after the events in casu took place.
23	Id at para [198].
24	 (2012) 33 ILJ 2353 (LAC) at para [34] [also reported at [2012] 12 BLLR 1246 (LAC); [2012] JOL 29409 (LAC) – Ed].
25	Id at para [33]. See also Tshishonga (supra) at para [186].
26	Id at para [35].
27	Id at para [36].
28	 In Radebe (supra) at para [36] it was said: ". . . A mistaken belief or one that is factually inaccurate can nevertheless be reasonable. A mistaken belief or one that is factually inaccurate can nevertheless be reasonable unless the information is so inaccurate that no one can have interest in its disclosure . . .".
29	 The court in Tshishonga (supra) at para [181] stated that "Smelling a rat" or "unsubstantiated rumours" would be insufficient for the purposes of reasonable belief under the PDA.
30	(2020) 41 ILJ 2553 (LAC) at para [67] [also reported at [2020] 10 BLLR 968 (LAC); [2020] JOL 47490 (LAC) – Ed].
31	 (2018) 39 ILJ 1278 (LAC) at para [26] [also reported at [2018] 5 BLLR 476 (LAC) – Ed]. The court was referring in the quoted passage to SA Municipal Workers Union National Fund v Arbuthnot (2014) 35 ILJ 2434 (LAC) at para [15]. See also para [28] of the judgment in John v Afrox where it was held: ". . . In holding that the appellant should prove the correctness of the facts for existence of the belief in order to enjoy protection, the court a quo elevated the requirement of the reasonableness of the belief to one of the accuracy of the facts upon which the belief was based. This sets a higher standard than what is required by the PDA, and such a requirement would frustrate the operation of the PDA . . .".
32	(2014) 35 ILJ 2419 (LAC) at para [31]. See also State Information Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd v Sekgobela (2012) 33 ILJ 2374 (LAC) at para [31] [also reported at [2012] 10 BLLR 1001 (LAC) – Ed], where the court accepted that the legitimacy of any disclosure does not depend on how it is treated by whoever it is made to.
33	 See Arbuthnot (supra) at para [23]. In Sekgobela (supra) at para [32], it was held that: ". . . an ulterior motive such as personal antagonism which might have been the predominant purpose for making the disclosure . . .", was incompatible with good faith. In Ngobeni v Minister of Communications and another (2014) 35 ILJ 2506 (LC) at para [54], the court referred to factors such as ". . . lack of honest intention, malice, ulterior motive, a quest for revenge, reckless abandon, a quest for self or others' advancement, and attempts to divert attention from one's or others' wrongdoing and involvement in criminal or acts of misconduct . . .", as negating good faith.
34	Id at para [83].
35	 See Tshishonga (supra) at para [170], where it was said: "Employees also have to act in the employer's best interest, to observe its right to confidentiality, to be loyal and ultimately to preserve its viability, good name and reputation . . .". Another example can be found in Legal Aid SA v Mayisela and others (2019) 40 ILJ 1526 (LAC) at para [63] [also reported at [2019] 5 BLLR 421 (LAC) – Ed], where it was held that where an employee threatens to report the employer to authorities, this threat does not constitute the disclosure of information as contemplated by the PDA.
36	Id at para [49].
37	 See Arbuthnot (supra) at para [25].
38	City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality v Engineering Council of SA and another (2010) 31 ILJ 322 (SCA) at para [33] [also reported at [2009] JOL 24640 (SCA); [2010] 3 BLLR 229 (SCA) – Ed].
39	 (2019) 40 ILJ 1224 (LAC) at para [63]. See also Gallocher v Social Housing Regulatory Authority and another (2019) 40 ILJ 2732 (LC) at para [70].
40	 A reward payable in terms of any law is however not part of this exclusion.
41	 As set out above, these conditions are that the employee has a reasonable belief of being subjected to an occupational detriment, it is likely that the information may be concealed or destroyed if the disclosure is made to the employer, the employee had previously made the disclosure to the employer and no action was taken by the employer, and/or the impropriety is of an exceptionally serious nature.
42	 See Malan v Johannesburg Philharmonic Orchestra (JA 61/11) [2013] ZALAC 24 at para [29].
43	Tshishonga (supra) at para [213].
44	Id at para [216].
45	 In Tshishonga (supra) at para [199], it was said: "There should be reasonable steps to investigate the matter. The employer should be given a chance to explain or correct the situation. The motivation for this approach is not to cover up wrongdoing, but because the internal remedy may be the most effective. Genuine engagement on the issues minimises the risks for both parties. An employee who refuses to engage runs the risk of not being able to show that his belief was reasonable . . .".
46	Id at para [207].
47	Tshishonga (supra) at para [209].
48	 In Nxele v National Commissioner: Department of Correctional Services and others (2018) 39 ILJ 1799 (LC) at para [25], the court said: ". . . Occupational detriment, in relation to an employee or a worker, means, inter alia, being subjected to any disciplinary action or being dismissed, suspended, demoted, harassed or intimidated." See also Radebe (supra) at para [77].
49	Id at paras [94]–[95]. See also Lowies v University of Johannesburg (2013) 34 ILJ 3232 (LC) at para [51] [also reported at [2014] JOL 32066 (LC) – Ed].
50	Id at para [53].
51	(1999) 20 ILJ 1718 (LAC) at para [32] [also reported at [1999] 10 BLLR 1005 (LAC); [1999] JOL 5067 (LAC) – Ed].
52	Id at para [59].
53	 See Baxter (supra) at paras [60] and [84]; Mashaba v Telkom SA (2018) 39 ILJ 1067 (LC) at para [34].
54	 In Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union and another v City of Matlosana Local Municipality and another (2014) 35 ILJ 2459 (LC) at para [77], the court said: ". . . Thus, what I am required to establish is the 'proximate cause' of the disciplinary enquiry. It is clear that a disciplinary enquiry against an employee need not necessarily be the direct result of a disclosure. I propose that a useful and practical approach is to consider factors such as (i) the timing of the disciplinary enquiry; (ii) the reasons given by the employer for taking the disciplinary steps; (iii) the nature of the disclosure; (iv) and the persons responsible within the employer for taking the decisions to institute charges." See also Gallocher (supra) at para [74].
55	Id at para [56]. See also Baxter (supra) at para [64]; Nxumalo v Minister of Correctional Services and others (2016) 37 ILJ 177 (LC) at para [14]; Tshishonga (supra) at para [176].
56	Baxter (supra) at para [60]; Kroukam v SA Airlink (Pty) Ltd (2005) 26 ILJ 2153 (LAC) at para [28] [also reported at [2005] 12 BLLR 1172 (LAC); [2006] JOL 15771 (LAC) – Ed] per Davis AJA (as he then was); Nxumalo (supra) at para [16]; Magagane v MTN SA (Pty) Ltd and another (2013) 34 ILJ 3252 (LC) at para [75] [also reported at [2013] 8 BLLR 768 (LC) – Ed].
57	 Compare TSB Sugar (supra) at para [60].
58	
59	 Compare Radebe (supra) at para [38].
60	 Compare TSB Sugar (supra) at para [102].
61	 See Arbuthnot (supra) at para [23].
62	 This actually happened on 12 March 2018.
63	 Compare Communication Workers Union v Mobile Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd (2003) 24 ILJ 1670 (LC) at para [21] [also reported at [2003] 8 BLLR 741 (LC); [2003] JOL 11147 (LC) – Ed].
64	 Promulgated by way of GN80 as contained in GG number 25299 dated 8 August 2003 (as amended). The FSB Code is promulgated under s 15 of the FAIS Act.
65	 Clause 2 of the FSB Code.
66	 Clause 3(1)(d) of the FSB Code.
67	 See clauses 10(1)(c) and (d) of the FSB Code.
68	 Clause 10(1)(e)(i) of the FSB Code.
69	 Ss 21(1)(a) and 21(4) of the FMA.
70	 This concept is defined in the Determination of Fit and Proper Requirements for Financial Services Providers, 2017 (the Determination), issued under s 6A of the FIAS Act and promulgated in GG number 41321 dated 15 December 2017. Clause 10(1) of the Determination reads: "An FSP and key individual must disclose to the Registrar . . . promptly and on own initiative, fully and accurately, all information . . . which may be relevant in determining whether that person compiles or continues to comply with the requirements relating to honesty, integrity and good standing.".
71	 See clauses 9(1)(f) and (l) of the Determination.
72	 Compare State Information Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd v Sekgobela (2012) 33 ILJ 2374 (LAC) at para [29] [also reported at [2012] 10 BLLR 1001 (LAC) – Ed]; Tshishonga (supra) at paras [269]–[270]; Gallocher (supra) at para [71].
73	Id at para [101].
74	 Compare Tshihsonga (supra) at para [272].
75	Id at para [102].
76	(2010) 31 ILJ 322 (SCA) at para [45] [also reported at [2009] JOL 24640 (SCA); [2010] 3 BLLR 229 (SCA) – Ed].
77	Id at para [94]
78	 The closer the temporal connection between the event and the action forming the cause of complaint, the more likely or the stringer [stronger] the inference would be it is that the action was as a result of the event.
79	 (2006) 27 ILJ 107 (LAC) at para [14] [also reported at [2006] 2 BLLR 107 (LAC); [2005] JOL 16157 (LAC) – Ed]. See also General Food Industries Ltd v Food and Allied Workers Union (2004) 25 ILJ 1260 (LAC) at para [46] [also reported at [2004] 7 BLLR 667 (LAC); [2004] JOL 12700 (LAC) – Ed]; Simelane and others v Letamo Estate (2007) 28 ILJ 2053 (LC) at paras [22] and [23]; United People's Union of SA on behalf of Khumalo v Maxiprest Tyres (Pty) Ltd (2009) 30 ILJ 1379 (LC) at para [29].
80	Id at para [86].
81	 (2010) 31 ILJ 2383 (LC) at para [27] [also reported at [2010] JOL 26216 (LC) – Ed].
82	 (2008) 29 ILJ 1039 (LC) at para [48].
83	 (2011) 32 ILJ 625 (LC) at paras [43]–[44].
84	 In Matteus v Octagon Marketing (Pty) Ltd (J 2264/13) [2013] ZALCJHB 317 at para [12], the court held: ". . . it is sufficient for an applicant to show, on balance, that the prejudice suffered by him or her is wholly or partially attributable to the protected disclosure made. This will ordinarily require an examination of the degree of temporal proximity between the disclosure and the detriment, the reasons proffered for the occupational detriment, and the like" (emphasis added).
85	 The applicant explained on the Kruger Rand and CAT1 charges that these were lengthy processes, were only started in beginning 2018, was still ongoing, and would take some time to complete. Also, Carter conceded in the disciplinary hearing that the charges relating to the applicant not keeping a register of representatives and being absent from the office without explanation had no substance.
86	 It may be said that on the facts, this contract was sent to the applicant by Christopher Clarke from Saxo to sign on 26 February 2018, the applicant raised a query, and then was suspended on 18 March 2018 whilst the query was still being dealt with. It is difficult to understand how this can be legitimately said to be misconduct justifying dismissal.
87	 The employment contract was only sent to the applicant in 2018.
88	Id at para [99].
89	Id at para [100].
90	 (2007) 28 ILJ 2238 (LAC) at para [30] [also reported at [2007] JOL 20279 (LAC) – Ed].
91	 See Heath v A & N Paneelkloppers (2015) 36 ILJ 1301 (LC) at paras [71]–[72]; Naude v Member of the Executive Council, Department of Health, Mpumalanga (2009) 30 ILJ 910 (LC) at para [113]. In Tshishonga (supra) at para [288], the court said: "Detriment suffered by whistle-blowers generally, and in the particular circumstances of this case, is akin to a very serious form of discrimination that merits a very high award . . ..".
92	 (2002) 23 ILJ 695 (LAC) at paras [48]–[49]. The court at para [50] also set out some of the factors that have to be considered in exercising the discretion in determining the quantum of compensation in such a case. In Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development and another v Tshishonga (2009) 30 ILJ 1799 (LAC) at para [18] [also reported at [2009] 9 BLLR 862 (LAC); [2009] JOL 23712 (LAC) – Ed], the court described this punitive element as compensation for non-patrimonial loss, and concluded that assistance can be gained from the jurisprudence relating to the award of a solatium in terms of the actio injuriarum.
93	Id at para [98].
94	 See Maroveke v Talane NO and others (2021) 42 ILJ 1871 (CC) at paras [31] and [33] [also reported at [2021] 9 BLLR 851 (CC); 2021 (10) BCLR 1120 (CC) – Ed], where the court, albeit in the context of backpay in the case of reinstatement, said: "A determination whether an employee has been put in a better position than she would have been in had she remained employed requires an enquiry into what that employee earned at the new place of employment. . . . The Labour Court should have taken the difference into account when determining the backpay, compensated for this difference." Applying this reasoning in casu, the difference in salary between what the applicant would have earned over the period of 24 months following his dismissal as compared to what he indeed earned, in itself amounts to a loss of equivalent to approximately 10 months' remuneration. Added to this, a six months' punitive award would be fair – see Heath (supra) at para [82].
95	 In Kemp t/a Centralmed v Rawlins (2009) 30 ILJ 2677 (LAC) at para [27] [also reported at [2009] 11 BLLR 1027 (LAC); [2009] JOL 23972 (LAC) – Ed], the court held that: ". . . The court has to consider all the relevant circumstances and make such order as it deems fair to both parties in the light of everything . . ..".
96	 See Zungu v Premier of the Province of KwaZulu-Natal and others (2018) 39 ILJ 523 (CC) [also reported at [2018] 4 BLLR 323 (CC); 2018 (6) BCLR 686 (CC) – Ed]; National Union of Mineworkers v Samancor Limited (Eastern Chromes Mines) 2021 JDR 1249 (CC) [also reported at [2021] 9 BLLR 883 (CC); 2021 (10) BCLR 1191 (CC) – Ed]; Long v South African Breweries (Pty) Ltd and others (2019) 40 ILJ 965 (CC) [also reported at 2019 (5) BCLR 609 (CC); [2019] 6 BLLR 515 (CC) – Ed].
97	(2021) 42 ILJ 2371 (CC) at paras [34]–[35] [also reported at 2021 (11) BCLR 1249 (CC); [2021] 12 BLLR 1173 (CC) – Ed].
98	 See Tshishonga (supra) at para [311]; TSB Sugar (supra) at para [104]; Baxter (supra) at para [98].

Appearance:
Adv P Kirstein, Johan Nysschens Attorneys (At); Adv A Redding SC, Carter and Associates Attorneys (R)


End of Document