



Chemical Energy, Paper, Printing, Wood and Allied Workers Union obo Lewack / Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd [2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI)
Judgments Online

Division: National Bargaining Council for the Chemical Industry
Case No: ECCHEM594-11/12
Hearing Date(s): None Indicated
Award Date(s): 08 / 07 / 2013 
Before: S Baron


Keywords


Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Derivative misconduct — Employee in pharmaceutical laboratory failing to report colleague for consuming company product — Dismissal fair

Mini Summary


The applicant employee was dismissed along with seven colleagues for consuming product belonging to the respondent. Four had pleaded guilty, and the remaining four, including the applicant, had pleaded not guilty. The applicant employee denied that she had consumed the product, and that she had seen any of her colleagues doing so.

The Commissioner noted that the employee whom the applicant had denied consuming “Guronsan C” had admitted to doing so. The overwhelming probability that the applicant had seen her colleague consuming the product was confirmed on videotape. The colleague had made no attempt to conceal her action from the applicant. This indicated that the applicant was perfectly aware of what her colleague was doing. The applicant was accordingly guilty of “derivative misconduct” – failure to inform her employer of misconduct perpetrated by colleagues. Her dismissal was fair.

The application was dismissed.

 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 1




Details of hearing and representation

[1]    This arbitration was finalised on 27 June 2013 under the auspices of the National Bargaining Council for the Chemical Industry at the offices of the Metal and Engineering Bargaining Council in Port Elizabeth.

[2]    The applicant, Ms Valencia Lewack, was present and was represented by Mr Karools Adams, an official from the trade union CEPPWAWU.

[3]    The respondent, Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, was represented by Mr Oliver Smith, an official from REOSA, an employer's organisation.

[4]    The proceedings were digitally recorded.

 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 2

Issue to be decided

[5]    I am required to determine whether the applicant's dismissal was substantively unfair and if so, determine the appropriate remedy.

 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 3

Background to the dispute

[6]    The applicant commenced permanent employment with the respondent as an operator on 1 February 2009, but was working for the respondent on a contract basis since 1998. At the time of her dismissal on 23 August 2012, the applicant was earning R11 034,95.

[7]    It is common cause that eight employees were involved in incidents involving the consumption of company products; some were charged for either consuming the respondent's products or that they were aware that company products were being consumed. Four of the employees pleaded guilty whilst the other four pleaded not guilty but were all subsequently dismissed.

[8]    The applicant's dismissal was preceded by a disciplinary hearing and the charges upon which she was found guilty and dismissed were formulated as follows:

“Charge 1: Failure to report an employee consuming company product on 17 July 2012.

Charge 2: Playing computer games on 17 July 2012.”

[9]    The applicant pleaded guilty on the second charge, but not guilty on charge one. It is accepted by the parties that, on its own, playing computer games would not attract the sanction of dismissal in the first instance, but that the charges were put together for purposes of sanction by the Chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry.

[10]    The applicant urged me to reinstate her in the event that I find in her favour.

Survey of evidence and argument

[11]    The respondent submitted a bundle of documents into evidence and called two witnesses to testify in support of its version. The applicant testified herself.

Respondent's case

[12]    Mr Michael Vrettos testified that he worked for the respondent as the security manager for both the Port Elizabeth and East London operations. His role includes the protection of all assets and company products as well as the safety of all persons entering the respondent's sites. He has been in the security industry for approximately eight years.

[13]    He only met the applicant as a result of the incident involving the consumption of the respondent's product called Guronsan C and her involvement therein. In that regard, he was alerted by a reliable source that in the IPC lab specifically, where Guronsan C was being manufactured and tested, large scale abuse of the product occurred and that the whole department was aware of this.

[14]    He decided that the easiest and most effective way of dealing with the issue is to place covert cameras in the IPC lab. It was also decided that the two cameras would be installed from different angles. It soon became 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 4
apparent that serious transgressions were taking place and that Guronsan C were indeed being consumed by certain employees and that those employees who did not consume the product were aware of such consumption. None of the dismissed employees disputed that Guronsan C was being mixed and consumed in the IPC lab.

[15]    Since the respondent manufactures medicine to be used by the public, it needs to ensure that the products are handled in a safe manner and not to allow a contaminated product to be used by a consumer. As such, they have to have very strict procedures in place for the protection of the product as well as people consuming the product.

[16]    One of the procedures is that eating and drinking are not allowed in particular areas. The respondent is very much against the consumption of any of its products and the implicated employees, who had been with the company for a long time, knew very well that it constitutes a dismissible offence. The IPC lab is one of the areas where the drinking of water is prohibited and specific drinking fountains were put up for use by employees. Drinking water in that area would therefore constitute a breach of a company rule.

[17]    As part of his testimony, Mr Vrettos explained and interpreted the video footage, which was shown in clips in order to provide a holistic background of the goings on in the IPC lab prior to, the day of the incident that gave rise to the applicant's dismissal, as well as after the incident. I do not wish to repeat all the observations made by Mr Vrettos as well as my own observations, but will only refer to those I thought relevant in determining the matter.

[18]    On the day in question, one of the employees accused of consuming Guronsan C, a Mr Gilbert Tame, entered the area with a cleaning trolley containing a blue bucket, puts something which looked like tablets into the bucket, drinks from the bucket and placed the bucket under a table from where it could be seen on the camera that shows that particular angle.

[19]    An hour later the applicant can be seen sitting in front of a computer playing computer games. Another employee, identified as Ms Lettie Verwey, entered the lab, spoke very briefly to the applicant and after the applicant moved her chair away to make space for her, Ms Verwey bent underneath the table where the blue bucket was and proceeded to consume some of the contents of the bucket. It was Mr Vrettos's evidence that Ms Verwey later pleaded guilty to consuming company product and she confirmed that it was indeed Guronsan C that she consumed.

[20]    Another person, identified as Ms Faith Tobias, entered the IPC lab and was seen observing Ms Verwey consuming some of the contents of the blue bucket. At a certain point, and whilst Ms Verwey was busy underneath the table right under the applicant, almost between her legs, the applicant was looking down at Ms Verwey. Ms Tobias was seen looking nervously at the cameras whilst this occurred and she thereafter left the lab with Ms Verwey. It transpired and was not disputed that Ms Tobias  
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 5
pleaded guilty of not disclosing the consumption by Ms Verwey on that particular day.

[21]    Mr Vrettos further testified that the applicant was aware of the respondent's policies regarding consumption of company products as well as the duty to report any wrongdoing. The applicant, he testified, was given training on whistle blowing and she knew exactly how to use the tip off line as a means to report wrongdoing without the fear of being compromised. Mr Vrettos referred to the particular documents in the bundle in support of his statement.

[22]    He stated under cross-examination that Ms Verwey was very comfortable to consume the product in front of the applicant without the fear of being reported. The applicant was fully aware of what was going on. He also mentioned that there is always Guronsan C available in that area, even if there was no production.

[23]    Ms Hermien van Rensburg, the respondent's Head of Production, testified that she was the Chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry. She has been in the respondent's employ for thirteen years and also made mention of her qualifications in respect of how it is applicable to her job.

[24]    She also testified that if the respondent fails to exercise proper control over its products, it stands to lose its manufacturing license, which in turn could spell the end of the jobs of approximately 2000 people being employed there. The laws governing the industry also prohibit persons other than medical practitioners to sell, dispense and prescribe medicine.

[25]    The risk for an employee consuming Guronsan C is that it has a high caffeine content and if consumed excessively would have the same effect as drinking lots of Red Bull. The product also contains vitamins which could build up in the body if it is consumed regularly.

[26]    Ms Van Rensburg corroborated the evidence of Mr Vrettos with regards to the ways in which misconduct could be reported by making use of the toll free number or perhaps using the email address. Furthermore, all the policies with regards to the duty of employees to report incidences of misconduct as well as the specific types of misconduct that needed to be reported are well known to the applicant and are contained in the respondent's bundle.

[27]    As Chairperson of the hearing, she testified that she took all the circumstances surrounding the case into consideration which included mitigating and aggravating circumstances as well as the consideration of the appropriate sanction. With regards to the challenge by the applicant that she actually found the applicant guilty of dishonesty whereas dishonesty did not form part of the charge, she clarified that issue by testifying that the mention of dishonesty was actually done during the employer's submission of aggravating factors after the guilty finding. However, she did testify that the misconduct the applicant was found guilty of does contain elements of dishonesty.

[28]    Ms Van Rensburg further testified, with reference to the respondent's Code of Conduct, that the applicant's conduct is applicable to various  
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 6
offences found in the Code, all for which dismissal in the first instance may be sanctioned.

[29]    She confirmed that Ms Verwey pleaded guilty on consuming the respondent's product on 17 July 2012 and that Ms Tobias was also found guilty of not disclosing other employees consuming company product. She further confirmed that the consumption of food and water are strictly forbidden in the area because Guronsan C is an effervescent product highly susceptible to water. To that effect, she corroborated Mr Vrettos' evidence that water fountains are placed in specific areas.

[30]    The trust relationship, Ms Van Rensburg testified, had been broken irretrievably by the actions of the applicant and cannot be restored. The applicant should therefore not be reinstated back into the respondent's employ, even in a position other that the one she occupied prior to her dismissal.

Applicant's case

[31]    The applicant testified that she worked for the respondent on contract for 18 years prior to her permanent appointment in 2009. During her full tenure with the respondent, she has never been disciplined for any type of misconduct prior to the current matter.

[32]    On the day in question, she came to work, but because the batch was not "signed on", was unable to continue with her work and as a result, decided to keep herself busy playing computer games.

[33]    She testified that her job entailed being a machine operator, but that she previously worked in the capsule department and was moved to the IPC lab where she worked with compression of tablets and different other products, but she was not trained on how to do it, she just had to do it.

[34]    She stated further that on the day in question, she did not observe the blue bucket that was placed by Ms Verwey under the table where she was seen sitting whilst playing computer games. According to her, she did not see the bucket at all during that day.

[35]    Ms Verwey, she testified, entered the room on the day in question, pushed her aside and proceeded to bent over to do something underneath the table. She testified that at all times, she was concentrating on the computer game she was busy playing and as a result, took no notice of what Ms Verwey was up to underneath the table. Furthermore, she was new in the department and was of the opinion that perhaps Ms Verwey was busy with a particular procedure and as a result, she was not suspicious of what Ms Verwey was doing.

[36]    The applicant confirmed that the drinking of water was not allowed in the IPC lab and that water fountains were placed at the front entrance of the department for use by employees.

[37]    It is thus the applicant's case that she did not see the bucket, did not see what Ms Verwey was doing under the table, was not aware that company product was being consumed and therefore was not in a position to report any wrongdoing on the part of Ms Verwey to the respondent.

 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 7

[38]    Under cross-examination, the applicant testified that she was not working in the IPC lab (it was not her work area). On a question on whether, if that was the case, she was not allowed in that particular area and thus "out of bounds", she testified that employees get called at times to assist and, since she was waiting for the batch to start running, she was playing computer games. She admitted that the computer is a very important piece of equipment because it is where data is stored crucial to the production and quality of the product being manufactured. She testified that the computer was open and she could therefore access it.

[39]    The applicant further confirmed that Guronsan C was being manufactured in the IPC lab. She further confirmed that Ms Verwey was also working in the IPC lab. The applicant agreed with Mr Oliver that she did receive whistle blowers training and was sensitized on the respondent's policies during her induction into the company.

[40]    She further testified that she did not know Ms Verwey on a personal level. She also did not observe any preparation of a Guronsan C mixture done by any of the implicated employees.

Analysis of evidence and argument

[41]    The applicant did not place the procedural fairness of the dismissal in dispute and in the absence of any glaring defects in the procedure leading up to the dismissal, I can safely conclude that the dismissal was effected in accordance with a fair procedure.

[42]    In determining substantive fairness, I must consider item 7 of Schedule 8 of the Code of Good Practice of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended. The following aspects require consideration:

Whether or not the employee contravened a rule or standard regulating conduct in, or in relevance to the workplace; and
If the rule or standard was contravened, whether or not:
The rule was a valid or reasonable rule or standard;
The employee was aware, or could reasonably have been aware of the rule;
The rule or standard has been consistently applied by the employer; and
Dismissal was an appropriate sanction for the contravention of the rule or standard.

[43]    The parties agreed that amongst the issues listed, I am only required to determine whether the applicant was in breach of the rule and if so, whether dismissal was appropriate under the prevailing circumstances.

[44]    The respondent presented its evidence in such a clear and comprehensive manner that probing its witnesses for further clarity was reduced to the bare minimum, and for that I am grateful. Having said that though, the issue for me to determine is a rather simple one: did the applicant observe another employee consume company product on 17 July 2012?

 
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 8

[45]    For some inexplicable reason, the applicant's version is that she did not see the bucket at all. The video footage clearly reveals that, at the point where the applicant moves away from the table to make space for Ms Verwey, was in clear sight, not only of the bucket, but also of what Ms Verwey was doing: drinking from the bucket. There is no dispute about the fact that water was not to be consumed in the IPC lab. It is, therefore, highly unlikely that the applicant thought that Ms Verwey was drinking water – let alone dirty mopped up water – from the bucket.

[46]    I say this because the applicant was so far away from the table, that she was actually stretching in order to control the mouse of the computer whilst engaging in the games she was busy playing. Furthermore, even though she looked down to Ms Verwey only for a brief moment, it must have been enough for her to spot what was going on.

[47]    Further, the applicant did not challenge the respondent to prove that Ms Verwey pleaded guilty on drinking Guronsan C. Instead, Mr Adams put it to Mr Vrettos that Ms Verwey will be called to testify that the applicant was not aware that it was Guronsan C in the bucket. But the applicant was aware and did not dispute that only Guronsan C is being manufactured in that area.

[48]    There is no doubt in my mind, after having viewed the video footage several times, that it is also near impossible that the applicant did not see, firstly, the blue bucket underneath the table and secondly, Ms Verwey drinking from the bucket. She was not looking at Ms Verwey's back as she contended; she had a side view and could see what was being done by Ms Verwey.

[49]    The duck and dive manner in which it was done should certainly have raised suspicions with the applicant that company products are being consumed. Ms Verwey could certainly not have been busy with some "procedure". I agree with Mr Vrettos that Ms Verwey looked very at ease in the presence of the applicant. Ms Verwey would not have been so bold as to drink Guronsan C in the presence of the applicant if she did not know the applicant and/or if the applicant had not been aware of the ongoing practice. Conversely, the applicant would certainly have questioned Ms Verwey on what she was doing, but because she was in all probability aware exactly what Ms Verwey was doing, she did not do so.

[50]    On the whole therefore, the more probable version is that the applicant knew that Ms Verwey was consuming company product, more specifically, Guronsan C and failed to report that incident to respondent's management via the vehicles provided for that. As a result, I find the applicant also guilty on charge one.

[51]    This brings me to the issue of whether dismissal was the appropriate sanction under the circumstances. In essence, although the applicant was never seen consuming company product, she is guilty of what is now a firmly established doctrine of "derivative misconduct". The requirements for derivative misconduct are that the employee must have known or could reasonably have acquired knowledge of the wrongdoing and failed  
[2013] JOL 31094 (NBCCI) at 9
without justification to disclose that knowledge to the employer, or take reasonable steps to help the employer acquire that knowledge.

[52]    In Chauke and others v Lee Service Centre CC t/a Leeson Motors 1999 8 LAC 8.26.1 [reported at [1998] JOL 3076 (LAC) – Ed], the Labour Appeal Court extended the concept of derivative misconduct and had this to say:

"This approach involves a derived justification, stemming from an employee's failure to offer reasonable assistance in the detection of those actually responsible for the misconduct. Though the dismissal is designed to target the perpetrators of the original misconduct, the justification is wide enough to encompass those innocent of it, but who through their silence make themselves guilty of a derivative violation of trust and confidence."

Therefore, employees who fail to assist the employer in conducting the investigation almost associate themselves with it, and they are therefore guilty of "derivative” misconduct.

[53]    The Constitutional Court case of Sidumo and another v Rustenberg Platinum Mines Ltd and others (2007) 28 ILJ 2405 (CC) [also reported at [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC) – Ed], enjoins Commissioners to take into account the totality of the circumstances surrounding the dismissal of an employee. As such, I need to take into account, inter alia, the importance of the rule that had been breached; the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal; the basis of the employee's challenge to the dismissal; the harm caused by the employee's conduct; whether additional training and instruction may result in the employee not repeating the misconduct; the effect of the dismissal on the employee and his/her long service record.

[54]    In considering the principles set out in the two judgments, I am satisfied that the applicant, through her failure to report the serious misconduct by another employee, destroyed any trust the respondent may reasonably have had in her. It cannot be mitigated by the fact that she worked for the respondent for such a long period. Hence, in the light of all the prevailing circumstances, I find that dismissal was a fair sanction. The dismissal is, therefore, substantively fair.

Award

[55]    The dismissal of the applicant, Ms Valencia Lewack, by the respondent, Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd was substantively fair.

[56]    The application is dismissed and the applicant is not entitled to any relief.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:




Appearance:
Mr Karools Adams (At); Mr Oliver Smith (R)


End of Document