



Joubert / Ground Crew (Pty) Ltd t/a First Catering SA [2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation & Arbitration, Johannesburg
Case No: GAJB2647-09
Date: 13/08/2009
Before: R Bracks, Commissioner
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(ii) of the LRA
Dismissal — Proof of — Employer claiming that employee resigned while on suspension on strength of erroneous referral of constructive dismissal dispute — Employee dismissed by being refused access to workplace.
Unfair labour practice — Suspension — Stopping of employee’s petrol allowance while on suspension with full benefits constituting unfair labour practice.

Editor’s Summary


After the applicant was suspended from duty and told not to return to work, he consulted an attorney. The attorney erroneously referred a dispute on his behalf concerning an alleged constructive dismissal. At the conciliation hearing, the employee explained that the dispute was about his suspension, and asked if the referral could be rectified. The employer held him to his original claim. The applicant then resigned, and he referred a further dispute concerning an alleged constructive dismissal. The unfair labour practice and constructive dismissal matters were joined. The respondent claimed that the applicant had resigned in spite of its efforts to resolve his problems. 

The commissioner noted that the applicant had been suspended pending the outcome of an investigation into irregularities perpetrated by the applicant. While the suspension itself was lawful, the employer had also stopped the applicant’s petrol allowance, to which he was contractually entitled. This was unlawful and unfair.

The commissioner found further that the respondent’s claim that the applicant had resigned was based solely on the initial referral, which had erroneously been categorised as a dispute concerning an alleged constructive dismissal. This was disingenuous, because the applicant had several times indicated that he had not resigned. By refusing the applicant access to the workplace, the respondent had dismissed him.

The applicant was reinstated with retrospective effect.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration was scheduled for hearing at the CCMA offices in Gauteng at 127 Fox Street, Johannesburg over several days culminating on the 3 August 2009. The applicant was represented by Ms Erasmus and the respondent by Mr Mengel from FREO, an employers’ organisation. The proceedings were recorded both manually and electronically. 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1285

Issue to be decided
Whether or not the applicant was dismissed and if so, whether or not the dismissal was fair. 

Background to the issue
The applicant was suspended on 14 March 2008. On the 1 August 2008, he returned to work but was told to return on the 4 August. He then referred a dispute to the bargaining council through his attorney. On the 8 August 2008 during a meeting at the respondent’s office, it came to his attention that his attorney had referred the matter as an unfair dismissal – constructive dismissal instead of an unfair labour practice (unfair suspension). The applicant tried to rectify this through his attorney but the respondent refused to accept the new referral and insisted that the applicant had resigned holding him to his referral that it was a constructive dismissal. The applicant again tendered his services on the 11 August 2008. The respondent stated he had resigned. Two referrals which were joined were sent to the CCMA.
The dispute was referred to the CCMA on 10 December 2008 and conciliated on 27 January 2009 when it remained unresolved. 

Survey of evidence and argument

Evidence

Documentary 

Bundles “A” and “R” were submitted. 

Employee’s evidence:

The applicant, Christiaan Joubert, after being sworn in testified in brief as follows:

He gave a detailed account of his development within the organisation until the organisation was taken over by the new management. Under the new management he was demoted to transport and maintenance manager. On the 14 March 2008, he was suspended. He accounted to what led to his suspension. He was informed that there would be an investigation and that the reason for the suspension was to avoid them interfering with the investigation. The suspension was on full pay and benefits. He was not allowed to give any input. 
Despite the company’s undertaking that he would receive his full benefits, his petrol card was suspended on the 26 June 2008. He met with one Mr Roode to discuss his suspension. Roode called Dino Rakitzis who informed them that the case was completed and nothing was found against him. Rakitzis informed Roode that the matter would be resolved. His petrol usage between 18 May and 8 August 2008 amounted to R10 525,09.
On the 26 June 2008 he met with his attorney, Mr Du Randt, who managed to secure a meeting with Rakitzis. At the meeting, the above 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1286
  information regarding the investigation was confirmed. During the meeting a possible settlement of two months salary was also discussed. He understood from Rakitzis that his suspension would be lifted and that he would return to work on the 4 August 2008, but that he would then be subjected to retrenchment negotiations. The applicant chose to go through the retrenchment process.
On 4 August, he reported for duty. At the office he discovered that it was occupied. At the same time Ms Motha arrived and called him to the HR office where she told him to leave as he was not allowed to be there. He asked her to put it in writing which she did (A13). He went to discuss the matter with his attorney who decided to send the company a letter. This was followed by a second letter (A15 and 16). Motha called him and informed him to apply for leave and told him to return on the 8 August 2008 to meet with Mr Mengel and discuss the situation. He asked her to put this in writing which she did (A17).
On the 5 August 2008, he reported for duty and he was told to fill in a leave form which he refused on his legal advisor’s instruction. He then called his attorney and Ms Motha spoke to him. The attorney then told them that he was going to refer the matter to the bargaining council.
He was instructed by Du Randt to report to his office. Du Randt was extremely busy with a major case so he asked the applicant to sign a blank referral. He understood that an unfair labour practice was going to be referred. The form was submitted on the 5 August 2008. He was advised by an ex-employee that the company was in the process of retrenching and what to expect
On the 8 August, he attended a meeting with Mengel. After a while they were joined by Motha who asked the applicant to leave and she had a discussion with Mengel. He was called back and informed that they had received his referral and asked if they could settle the dispute. He asked them to put their proposals in writing and refer it to his attorney. According to him, he was under the impression that they were referring to the unfair labour practice dispute. He was offered four months but no agreement was reached as he wanted 12 months. At the end of the meeting Mengel told him his contract was terminated. This confused him. After the meeting, he called his attorney to advise him of what had transpired. However, he was not available. He then called his (applicant’s) wife. She was surprised that his contract was terminated.
He was called by his attorney to whom he relayed what had transpired. The attorney told him that there must be a big mistake and he had to check the referral form. This was then that he discovered for the first time that the matter was marked as constructive dismissal. The attorney then said he would telephone Mengel and inform him that the referral was erroneous. The attorney called but Mengel was insistent that they should be settling the matter. The attorney informed him that they would be re-referring the matter. Later that day there was an offer of 6 months by the respondent.
The correct form was then sent to the respondent (A22 and 23). The first dispute was withdrawn and replaced with a new referral form. The 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1287
  applicant said he rejected the respondent’s proposal and was advised by his attorney to return to work which he did as he never intended terminating the agreement. On the 11 August 2008, he reported to Motha. She then called Mengel and handed the phone to the applicant. Mengel told him that he no longer worked for the company after which he left.
The witness then gave detailed evidence of the communications and consultations between his attorney, Mengel, Rakitzis, his wife and him as well as the various offers which were made in order to settle the matter. At one stage an offer was accepted but the respondent afterwards reneged on it and withdrew it (A93).
The applicant explained that his suspension affected him emotionally and turned his life upside down. To this extent he had to lend money from various sources to sustain him. He wanted to be reinstated so that his name could be cleared as he was a Christian and the rumour of his suspension had a negative effect on his life. He also wanted to be compensated for the petrol money he was forced to pay because the petrol card was stopped (A121–125).

The applicant called three witnesses who testified after being duly sworn in:

Jean Du Randt, applicant’s attorney, testified as follows:

He is the attorney of record. On 27 June 2008, he was consulted by the applicant and subsequently he wrote the letters appearing on A3–4. He tried to set up a meeting with Rakitzis. They eventually met on 1 August. He confirmed the applicant’s evidence that Rakitzis had informed them that nothing wrong was found against the applicant. Rakitzis said he had a mandate to settle the dispute and made an offer. This was rejected. Rakitzis informed them that if the applicant wanted to return he would be subjected to retrenchment as the company was being restructured. They calculated that he would be entitled to only 4 months salary.
It was agreed he would return on the 4 August 2008. A10 confirmed this. The witness confirmed the applicant’s evidence about had transpired on his return and the testimony the applicant gave concerning the witness, especially regarding the referral forms the witness had completed and sent to the bargaining council. To this extent the witness stated that when the applicant arrived at his office after the respondent had told him to apply for leave he advised him to refer the matter to the bargaining council. He was in the process of dealing with a High Court matter. He asked the applicant to sign the referral form. He then asked Natasha to attend to the referral.
He then also advised the applicant that since the meeting on the 8 August 2008 related to retrenchment he could not represent him and he would have to attend it on his own. He confirmed that the applicant telephoned him after the meeting to tell him that his contract was terminated. He went to Natasha’s office and when he opened the file he noticed the unfair dismissal and constructive dismissal boxes were ticked. Natasha told him it was a mistake.
He called Mengel to advise him. Mengel wanted to discuss settlement. The witness told him that the error first needed to be corrected as it was a 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1288
  bona fide mistake. He gave a detailed account of the discussion and said he concluded that the respondent was not interested in the applicant returning. He also gave a detailed account of what had transpired in their attempts to settle the matter between the parties.
When they tried to serve the unfair labour dispute referral, the company rejected it. He referred to various correspondence (A22, 32 and 36) in which he addressed the erroneous referral. He confirmed the applicant’s evidence that the applicant returned to work on the 11 August 2008 and what transpired thereafter. At a subsequent meeting involving amongst others Rakitzis an offer of 7 months was made and later reneged on. The basis of the offer was that they stated that reinstatement was not possible. The 7 months was inclusive of the petrol allowance. He referred to A88 where this issue was addressed with the respondent’s representative.

Natasha Wolfaardt, candidate attorney, testified as follows:

She was a candidate attorney. She confirmed that she was instructed by Du Randt to complete the referral form of the applicant (A18–21) which she sent out the form on the 5 August. She was instructed to refer an unfair labour practice dispute. At no stage was she told that the applicant had resigned. The reason she could have confused the cases was that she was dealing with another case involving resignation. She was not at any stage informed that the matter involved a dismissal.

Sonnette Joubert, applicant’s wife, testified as follows:

She was the applicant’s wife. He was suspended on the 14 March 2008. He left for a meeting at the respondent on 8 August 2008 and after the meeting he called to tell her that his services were terminated. She was surprised and advised him to contact a labour consultant who advised that this action was unfair and told them to phone Jean.
The witness knew nothing about the applicant resigning from the respondent. She said that he was being paid his salary during his suspension. She became extremely emotional and tearful as she explained the trauma they had experienced during the applicant’s suspension and due to the possibility the applicant might be retrenched. She said that during the 8 years the applicant had worked for the company he was very loyal and dedicated to them so much so that it sometimes bordered on neglect of his family.
According to her, the applicant was ashamed of what had happened to him and was extremely depressed by what he had to deal with. To this extent he found it difficult to go for interviews. Only their belief and faith had pulled them through.

Employer’s evidence

The respondent called one witness who testified after having been duly sworn in.

Alan Stanley Mengel testified as follows:

He knew the applicant from the time he started working at the respondent so there was no reason for him to prejudice the applicant. He could only testify regarding the incident relating to the applicant which took place on the 8 August 2008. 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1289
The respondent was a member of their employer’s organisation. In the week commencing on the 4 August 2008, he was requested to assist with the retrenchment process which involved a number of employees including the applicant. A meeting was accordingly arranged for the 8 August 2008 and the applicant agreed to be present. However, around the 6 or 7 August 2008 he was informed that the applicant had referred a dispute to the bargaining council (R18–21). When he viewed the referral he noticed that an unfair dismissal was referred for the discontinuation of the petrol card. He confirmed this with the respondent who told him it was suspended from May 2008. He also noted that the applicant was seeking compensation. On R21 he noted that the applicant had stated that his dismissal was due to a constructive dismissal.
He then thought that he could assist in resolving the dispute, that is both the unfair labour practice and the constructive dismissal. He told the applicant that the way he understood this was that the relationship was terminated. The applicant stated that when he arrived there on the 4 August 2008 he was prevented from working. The witness said that the applicant was there to work and he (the witness) was there for the retrenchment process. He told the applicant that the matter could be resolved as he was there to offer him a retrenchment package which he was entitled to. The applicant enquired about the amount and he told him it amounted to 4 months salary – about R120 000. The applicant asked if it was inclusive of his statutory amount. He told him it was not as he was entitled to leave pay of almost R43 000. The applicant said he first wanted to discuss this with Du Randt. He further requested that everything be put in writing and sent to Du Randt.
The offer was accordingly put in writing in A37. According to him during the meeting, only the retrenchment package was mentioned. He said that no mention was made of a mistake as regards the referral. The witness said what confirmed that there was a break in the relationship was the applicant’s comment that he had hoped that the offer would be higher (sic). This is confirmed in A38 and 39. The witness confirmed that on the 8 August 2008 he was informed that the referral form was erroneous. He said Du Randt confirmed also that they would like to settle the matter and if they could up the amount to R180 000. However, this offer was retracted even before they had an opportunity to consider it properly.
Subsequently, they received the referral form on A29–31. They had previously received a similar form from another employee who had also claimed constructive dismissal because his petrol card was stopped. The matter proceeded to the council and since it was outside their scope it proceeded to the Commission. The matters have since been consolidated.
Toward the end of October, Rakitzis requested a meeting in an attempt to settle the dispute. Here he named the parties that were present. During the meeting Du Randt asked to speak to the applicant in private. On his return Du Randt said he wanted to speak only to Rakitzis. At the end of the meeting a settlement was reached and Du Randt was supposed to draft the settlement agreement and forward it to the witness for his perusal. Two weeks passed and nothing transpired. Towards the end of October, 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1290
  beginning November he received a call from Du Randt who told him he was no longer representing the applicant. The witness then gave a detailed account of the conversation between him and Du Randt which culminated with Du Randt saying that any money that was paid to the applicant should be paid into his trust account. The witness then phoned Motha and advised her to tell Rakitzis not to pay out the money. The witness explained that at a later stage he had relayed his discussion with Du Randt to the management of the respondent at the head office. 
While Rakitzis was at that meeting with management he received a call from the applicant’s wife to advise him that the settlement was off. 
According to the witness the meeting with the applicant on 8 August 2008 was held to offer him a retrenchment package of R120 000. This amount was 1 month more than the law requires as the applicant would only had been entitled to 8 weeks for the 8 years he had worked. The applicant was aware that the company was in the process of retrenchment and he would have been subjected to that process if he had not decided to terminate his relationship with the respondent. If any confusion was created it was done by the applicant and his attorney. He believed that on 8 August 2008 that the applicant had understood that he had terminated his services. This was demonstrated in the manner in which he spoke.

Argument by applicant
The applicant’s representative gave a detailed closing argument and made reference to various case law authorities. This will not be repeated but only a summary of it will be given. The representative submitted that there was a joinder of the unfair labour practice and unfair dismissal referrals. In respect of the unfair labour practice referral which related to suspension with full benefits she submitted this was unfair as the company had stopped paying his benefits. In addition, the respondent also failed to follow a fair procedure by not allowing an opportunity to respond before being suspended. His suspension continued despite the company saying that no evidence of irregularity was found against him. 
In respect of the unfair dismissal, she submitted that it was illogical for the respondent to believe that he had terminated his services since he returned to work on 4 August 2008. Motha was informed that there was going to be a referral in respect of the unfair suspension. Thus, they could not believe that he had terminated his services. 
She submitted further that the applicant wanted to be reinstated with back pay. Further, she submitted that an amount of R60 000 was due and payable to the respondent and this should be deducted from that amount. She requested further that the outstanding amount in respect of the petrol allowance should also be paid to the applicant.

Argument by respondent
The respondent’s representative submitted that the applicant had brought about the termination of the employment relationship. There were numerous attempts on the respondent’s part to resolve the deadlock. 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1291

  However, this was thwarted by both the applicant and his wife. There could be no illusions that the applicant did not know that he was no longer an employee.

The representative submitted further that when the applicant attended the hearing no mentioned was made that the referral was incorrect. The applicant however did intimate at the hearing that he could no longer work there. From this the only inference which could be drawn was that he had decided that the work relationship was terminated.
According to the representative, all that he would have been entitled to if the matter had been allowed to proceed would have been a retrenchment package. The company did not terminate the relationship and it is the company who is now being seriously prejudiced. The respondent therefore cannot accept that it dismissed the applicant.
In respect of the suspension, he stated that the applicant had not suffered any prejudice during his suspension. The company had tried to resolve the issue. 

Analysis of evidence and argument
The Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“LRA”) prohibits unfair labour practices. An unfair labour practice is any unfair act or omission at the workplace, involving:
unfair conduct of an employer relating to the promotion or demotion or probation of an employee;
unfair conduct relating to the provision of training of an employee; 
unfair conduct relating to the provision of benefits (for example, pension, medical aid, etc) to an employee; 
unfair disciplinary action against an employee (short of a dismissal). For example, a final written warning or unfair suspension; 
the refusal to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement. For example, a retrenchment; 
an occupational setback in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 because an employee has made a protected disclosure defined in that Act. For example, an employee is denied overtime because he made a disclosure in terms of the “Disclosure of Information Act.”
From the undisputed evidence before me, it is clear that the respondent had launched an investigation into some irregularities in the company and there was a need to suspend the applicant. It rightfully did so on full pay and benefits. There is no evidence that the applicant had initially objected to the suspension. However, the situation changed immediately when the respondent decides to cancel the petrol allowance of the applicant. 
I find support for this view in Mogothle v The Premier of the Northwest Province & others case number J2622/08 [reported at [2009] 4 BLLR 331 (LC) – Ed] where Van Niekerk J held that:

“In summary each case of preventative suspension must be considered on its own merits. At a minimum though, the application of the contractual principle of fair dealing between employer and employee, imposing as it does

a continuing of fairness on employers when they make decisions affecting their employees, requires first that the employer has a justifiable reason to believe, prima facie at least, that the employee has engaged in serious misconduct; secondly, that there is some objectively justifiable reason to deny the employee access to the workplace based on the integrity of any pending investigation into the alleged misconduct or some other relevant factor that would place the investigation or the interests of affected parties in jeopardy; and thirdly, that the employee is given the opportunity to state a case before the employer makes any final decision to suspend the employee.” 

  Moreover, the respondent had completed its investigation long ago and yet failed to return the applicant to the workplace.

For this reason, it is my view that the respondent should refund the applicant the amount of R10 525 as well as compensation equivalent to one month’s salary.
Section 192 (1) of the LRA stipulates that in any proceedings concerning any dismissal, the employee must establish the existence of the dismissal. The onus was therefore on the applicant to show that he was dismissed. In addition, section 188 of the LRA (as amended), provides that an employee’s services should not be terminated unless the reason for such termination is fair and relates to conduct, capacity or operational requirements. Item 4 of Schedule 8 also stipulates that the termination of services should not be effected without a fair procedure being followed.
The respondent alleges that it did not dismiss the applicant and that the applicant had resigned because he had referred a constructive dismissal to the bargaining council instead of an unfair labour practice. The respondent was persistent with this attitude despite various correspondence from the applicant’s representative and a new referral showing that the first referral was a mistake.
I find the respondent’s argument that it believed that the applicant resigned based on his referral and because he had not said anything at the meeting to refute the respondent’s mistaken belief, disingenuous because there was specific communication from the applicant advising it about the mistake. I find support for this view in Uthingo Management (Pty) Ltd v Larry Shear NO, CCMA, Andre du Plessis & Craig Mills, case number JR2007/07 [reported at [2009] 6 BLLR 590 (LC) – Ed] where Molahleli J stated:

“An employment contract may be terminated by either an employer or an employee by giving written notice except in the case of illiterate employees. Notice of termination of an employment contract is regulated by section 37 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Contract Act 75 of 1997 (the BCEA). In Fijen v Council for Scientific & Industrial Research (1994) 15 ILJ 759 (LAC), Farlam J (as he then was) said at 772C–D with regard to the test for resignation that an employee has to ‘either by words or conduct, evidence a clear and unambiguous intention not to go on with his contract of employment.’ He went on to say that to resign he has to ‘act in such a way as to lead a reasonable person to the conclusion that he did not intend to fulfil his part of the contract.” 

  See cf Tuckers Land & Development Corporation v Hovis 1980 (1) SA 645 (A) at 653D–F [also reported at [1980] 1 All SA 358 – Ed].

 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1293

  In the English case of McAlwane v Boughton Estates Ltd [1973] ICR 470, Donaldson J said that: 

“[33] Tribunals should not find an agreement to terminate employment unless it is proved that the employee really did agree with full knowledge of the implications it had for him. [34] The courts look for unambiguous, unequivocal words to amount to a resignation (Hughes v Gwynedd Area Health Authority [1978] ICR 161) and the courts did not find such to be so when the employee was a mental defective and he uttered the words in the heat of the moment after an argument (Barclay v City of Glasgow District Council [1983] IRLR 313).”

There was a duty on the respondent to confront the applicant with its belief that he had resigned instead of just going on the referral. In any case this misconception was later dispelled when the representative sent various letters and a new referral form. Yet the respondent deliberately chose to persist with its mistaken belief.
In light of the above, it is my further view that as a result of the respondent refusing the applicant access to the work place it had in fact dismissed the applicant unfairly.
In terms of the Labour Relations Act, I am required to reinstate an employee who had been unfairly dismissed unless I believe that there are other compelling reasons not to do so. I have considered all the issues raised by the respondent as to why reinstatement would be inappropriate but I have found none of them compelling and accordingly order the applicant’s reinstatement.

Award
The respondent (Ground Crew (Pty) Ltd t/a First Catering SA) is ordered to reinstate the applicant (Chris Joubert) in its employ on the same terms and conditions as governed his employment before his dismissal.
The respondent is ordered to reinstate him with effect from the 1 September 2008.
The respondent is ordered pay Chris Joubert in the sum of R411 600 (four hundred and eleven thousand six hundred Rand), which is the equivalent of 12 month’s salary, ie from the 11 August 2008 to date of reinstatement, as back pay on the 1 September 2009.
The applicant, Chris Joubert is ordered to tender his services to Ground Crew (Pty) Ltd t/a First Catering SA on the 1 September 2009.
In addition, the respondent is ordered to pay the applicant the amount of R10 525 which is the applicant’s out-of-pocket expenses resulting from the cancellation of his petrol card as well as R34 300 which is compensation equivalent to one month’s salary in respect of the applicant’s unfair suspension.
Respondent is also entitled to off-set the amount of R60 000 which the applicant agreed is due and payable to the respondent. 
[2009] 12 BALR 1284 (CCMA) at 1294

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document