



Soqaga / University of Fort Hare [2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: ECEL3393-19
Date: 18/04/2025
Before: PM Venter, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Misconduct — Gross negligence — Senior university executive failing to investigate suspect tender and to discipline implicated employees — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was dismissed in 2019 after being found guilty of providing the respondent’s vice-chancellor with incorrect information relating to an investigation, sparked by a whistle blower, into a suspect cleaning tender and not disciplining implicated employees. After an award was issued declaring the applicant’s dismissal substantively unfair and ordering the respondent university to reinstate him, the Labour Court remitted the matter to be heard afresh by a commissioner from outside the Eastern Cape, to be decided on the transcript of the arbitration hearing and documents submitted then by the parties, and any further argument the parties wished to advance. The applicant argued, inter alia, that the hearing was irregular because it had been authorised by the VC.

The Commissioner noted that as chief audit executive, the applicant was responsible for drafting the university’s whistle blowing policy and ensuring that there was a proper audit trail, which was lacking. Although the applicant might not have been dishonest, he was at least grossly negligent to a degree which warranted disciplinary action and had also disobeyed an instruction by the VC. Dismissal was therefore appropriate.

The referral was dismissed. 

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

[1]  Details of hearing and representation 
This is the Arbitration Award that resulted from arbitration proceedings that were held under the auspices of the CCMA by means of MS Teams Online on abovementioned dates.
The applicant was present and represented by Advocate Pretorius SC whereas the respondent was represented by Advocate Saunders. 
Proceedings were electronically recorded and hand-written notes were kept. No interpreter was required by either party.  
[2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA) at 785

[2]  Background information
The matter has a protracted history and was previously arbitrated by Commissioner Mbuli who issued an arbitration award on 12 August 2020. Commissioner Mbuli found that the applicant’s dismissal was substantively unfair and he ordered reinstatement and the payment of arrear salaries. Aggrieved by the outcome, the respondent approached the Labour Court in terms of section 145 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (the “LRA”). 
On 24 October 2024, Honourable Justice Prinsloo ordered that the award be set aside and that the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (the “CCMA”) must schedule the matter de novo in front of a different senior commissioner from a different province. She also ordered that the newly appointed senior commissioner must determine whether misconduct was committed and whether dismissal was appropriate. She also ordered that the determination must be made based on the typed record of the previous arbitration proceedings, the relevant documents and that parties must have an opportunity to submit written and/or oral legal arguments in support of the typed record and documentation that was used. 
Parties therefore appeared as described above and submitted both written and oral arguments in support of their respective cases. 

“Investigation into the office of the Vice Chancellor – In relation to the investigation into the Vice Chancellors Office, the employee was grossly dishonest, misrepresented the facts and/or was grossly negligent in that:

You failed to ensure and/or confirm that the investigation was authorised by the chairperson of Council, the Council or any other person with necessary authority resulting in an unauthorised investigation being undertaken and/or

You failed to ensure and/or confirm that the investigator was duly appointed before providing information/instructions and/or internal documents to him and/or

You failed to ensure that the investigation had a defined and approved written scope, methodology and/or deadline before the investigation commenced which exposed the University to risk and/or. 

You failed to ensure that the approved scope, methodology and/or deadline of the investigation was sufficiently conveyed in writing to me and Ms. Thandi Mapukata (as employees of the University) before the investigation commenced which exposed the University to risk.

Investigation into the cleaning contract – You were insubordinate and/or refused to report to me in my capacity as the Vice Chancellor in relation to the cleaning contract and/or vehicles that were purchased in order for me to report to Council and/or the Department of Higher Education and Training and/or to put the necessary measures in place to limit the University’s risk. These measures include but are not limited to:

 
[2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA) at 786

Suspending and/or disciplining implicated employees, and/or handing documents over to the relevant authorities for criminal investigations and/or suspending, terminating or investigating service provider contracts and/or reporting external parties such as unions officials to their respective bodies and/or putting procedures or safeguards in place to prevent future irregularities and/or recovering amounts from staff members or external parties such as service providers.

Failure to act in the best interest of the University/Bringing the University into disrepute You failed to act in the best interest of the University as your employer and/or brought the University into disrepute when you conducted yourself as outlined.”

The applicant was appointed on 1 July 2012 and dismissed on 19 June 2019. The applicant held the position described above and earned a gross monthly income of R76 565,45.
As mentioned, I was only called upon to determine whether misconduct was committed and whether dismissal was appropriate. In doing so, I have considered the record that formed part of the review proceedings as well as written and oral submissions made by the parties. 

[3] Issue to be determined
I was called upon to determine whether the dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair within the ambit of section 188, read with section 191 of the LRA.
My exact terms of reference appeared in the Order from the Labour Court dated 24 October 2024.

[4] Preliminary matters
There were no preliminary matters.

[5] Analysis of evidence and arguments
The record is voluminous and I do not intend repeating exact evidence as same can be found in the record. The award will therefore focus on an analysis of evidence and arguments. 
During the previous arbitration proceedings the respondent called three witnesses although one of them testified about a charge that was abandoned. The remaining two witnesses were Prof Buhlungu, the Vice Chancellor and Adv Thandi Orleyn, the Chairperson of the respondent’s Council.
The first charge relates to the applicant’s failure to follow the Whistleblower Policy which he himself drafted and which policy required the authorisation of the Chairperson of the University Council, Adv Orleyn, before an investigation into the alleged misconduct of the Vice Chancellor, Prof Buhlungu, could be launched. It was alleged that the applicant failed to obtain authorisation and/or ensure and/or confirm that the investigation was authorised. It was accordingly alleged that he was dishonest or grossly negligent.  
[2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA) at 787
Paragraph 8 of the respondent’s written submission describes the following timeline which sets out evidence that led to the dismissal of the applicant:

On 12 March 2018 a whistleblower report was sent to the applicant regarding tender irregularities. 

On 27 March 2018 (and after it had been in the press) a whistleblower report went to the applicant regarding Prof Buhlungu’s alleged relationship with his office manager.

On 22 May 2018, a preliminary assessment on the allegations regarding Prof Buhlungu was done. 

On 19 June 2018 the Special Audit and Risk Committee (the “ARC”) met to discuss the allegations against the Prof Buhlungu.

On 2 July 2018, the applicant and the chairperson of ARC (Mr Lupuwana) met with Prof Buhlungu in Bisho.

On 4 July 2018, the applicant sent an affidavit relating to the cleaning services to Prof Buhlungu.

On 19 July 2018, the request for approval to appoint an external investigator to investigate the allegations against Prof Buhlungu was made. The ARC resolved that the investigation should be executed, but no reference to permission from the Chair of Council (Adv Orleyn) was made. 

On 24 July 2018, Prof Buhlungu reported the cleaning services matter to the Department of Higher Education. 

On 30 July 2018, Advocate Hucker was appointed to conduct the investigation into the purported misconduct of Prof Buhlungu.

On 12 August 2018, the applicant sent a letter to Prof Buhlungu to inform him of the investigation.

On 27 August 2018, approximately 2 weeks later, the Chair of the Human Resources Committee of Council wrote to the Chair of Council, with Mr Lupuwana in copy, raising concerns about the investigation, including whether written approval from her was obtained.

On 3 September 2018, Mr Lupuwana responded that the investigation is being conducted with the full knowledge of the Chair of Council.

On 20 October 2018, the applicant sent a statement about the housing investigation to Colonel Dyasi (from the SA Police Services).

On 5 November 2018 the Chair of the Human Resources Committee of Council wrote to the Chair of Council (Adv Orleyn) with further concerns, distinguishing between knowledge and approval. 

On 6 November 2018, the Chair of Council wrote to the Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) for his written report on the process of approval of the investigation into Prof Bahlungu and the office manager.

On 7 November 2018, the Chair of Council wrote to Mr Lupuwana and said that she did not receive information on the investigation 

against Prof Buhlungu and the office manager and she requested the supporting documents in the matter. On 8 November 2018, the CFO submitted his report to the Chair of Council.

On 9 November 2018 the CFO wrote to the Chair of Council and said that he had spoken to the applicant and Mr Lupuwana and they were both 100% satisfied that an audit trail exists to confirm that governance processes were followed and that the documents would be made available on request from Council.

On 19 November 2018, Adv Hucker released his audit report to the ARC. On 23 November 2018, the ARC met to go through Adv Hucker’s report. A special ARC meeting was held to consider the report, in which meeting ARC directed the Chairman (Mr Lupuwana) to meet privately with Adv Hucker to “inform him of quality assurance issues raised.

On 3 December 2018, Prof Buhlungu asked the applicant for an update on the investigation pertaining to the cleaning contract and the purchase of cars by university staff.

On 14 December 2018, Colonel Dyasi was purportedly scheduled to meet with Prof Buhlungu at the request of the applicant to give an update into the investigation regarding the cleaning contract and the purchase of cars. 

On 14 December 2018, Prof Buhlungu issued a notice of intention to suspend to the applicant. On 18 December 2018 the applicant responded in writing to the notice of intention to suspend him.

On 24 December 2018, ARC sent a letter to Prof Buhlungu setting out the basis upon which the suspension is, according to it, improper and threatening to report Prof Buhlungu for improper conduct. 

In an undated letter, the ARC sent a letter to Council setting out the basis upon which, according to it, the suspension is improper and imploring the Council to uplift the suspension.

On 3 January 2019, Prof Buhlungu responded to the letter from the ARC and invited Mr Lupuwana to report him to the necessary bodies. On 3 January 2019, Prof Buhlungu suspended the applicant. 

On 15 January 2019, the Chair of Council advised Prof Buhlungu that she had never approved or authorised Mr Ravgee (the CFO) on the matter and that Mr Lupuwana had informed her that there was no need to seek her approval. 

On 4 February 2019 the Chair of Council addressed a letter which was circulated to many people, informing them that the Chairperson of the ARC (Mr Lupuwana) had undermined her role as Chair of Council throughout and that she had never given her authority for the investigation to be conducted. 

On 4 April 2019, the charges were given to the applicant and on 12 April 2019 there was an unauthorised meeting of parts of Council who attempted to uplift the applicant’s suspension. 

On 29 April 2019, the respondent was placed under administration.

 
[2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA) at 789

On 29 May 2019, the applicant unsuccessfully launched an application to interdict the disciplinary proceedings.

On 17 June 2019, the internal chairperson made findings in respect of the applicant’s disciplinary enquiry and he was dismissed on 19 June 2019. 

One of the first issues that was raised was whether Prof Buhlungu was entitled to act against the applicant. The evidence suggests that the applicant had a dual reporting line in that Prof Buhlungu was the Vice Chancellor and therefore his senior, but that he also reported to Mr Lupuwana, the Chairperson of the ARC. This can also be found in the Internal Audit Charter (clause 6). I have no issue to accept the evidence of Prof Buhlungu that he was in fact the applicant’s senior as he was the Vice Chancellor and the notion that he had no authority to act against the applicant simply makes no sense. I have considered that the applicant reported to Mr Lupuwana in as far as functionality is concerned and to Prof Buhlungu in as far as administration was concerned. This does not mean that the applicant need not report to Prof Buhlungu or that he could ignore instructions. 

“The Chairperson of the Audit Committee will approve all investigations of reported concerns with the Vice Chancellor (sic) knowledge, except in cases where the Vice Chancellor is personally implicated, in which case the Chairperson of the University Council will approve the investigation.” 

The existence of the Policy is not in dispute and it is therefore clear that Adv Orleyn had to approve any investigation into alleged misconduct committed by Prof Buhlungu. The Internal Audit Charter spelled out the dual reporting line, but clause 7.1.3 of the Whistle Blow Policyer is very clear in that Adv Orleyn had to approve the investigation.

[Numbering as per Award – Ed.]

There is a huge factual dispute as to whether Adv Orleyn granted permission or not. There is no dispute that there was never any written approval granted by Adv Orleyn and Prof Buhlungu’s evidence is clear in this regard. This was later also confirmed by Adv Orleyn when she explained that she gave no approval whether in writing or verbally.
The applicant’s defence was that he met with Mr Lupuwana at an Engen garage and that the latter informed him that the Council approved the investigation. There is however conflicting evidence regarding the date when authority was granted.
I have no doubt that Adv Orleyn never authorised the investigation into alleged misconduct that was committed by Prof Buhlungu. Moreover, the relevant Policy is clear and required approval from 

her. Mr Lupuwana also testified, but he claimed that he obtained approval from Adv Orleyn, but this version was never put to Adv Orleyn when she testified. I therefore make very little of this part of evidence. 

The applicant’s explanations make very little sense. He held a very senior position and was tasked to be custodian of the Policy and was in fact the author of the Policy. He was employed as Chief Audit Executive and had to ensure that policies were adhered to and that there was a proper audit trial. He failed to do so and his excuse of being authorised by Mr Lupuwana is also not helpful. Mr Lupuwana was firstly not an employee of the respondent and the Policy clearly demonstrated that approval had to be granted by Adv Orleyn. 
I am however not convinced that the applicant was dishonest in not obtaining approval from Adv Orleyn and the respondent’s arguments are opportunistic. It can simply not be assumed that there was dishonesty involved and I do not accept that one can deduct from his conduct that he was dishonest.
The applicant was however grossly negligent in as far as the first allegation is concerned. To simply argue that written approval was not necessary makes very little sense and one would expect a much higher duty of care from a senior employee. I am therefore satisfied that the version of the respondent is to be preferred as it is simply more reasonable and contains no contradictions. The applicant committed the first offence that he was charged for. 
Turning to the second offence, the documentary evidence suggests that the applicant was requested by Prof Buhlungu to provide him with a written report about the cleaning contract. Instead of simply answering, the applicant referred Prof Buhlungu to Mr Lupuwana. He made no attempt to submit the required report and his excuse for non-compliance was that reporting lines had to be followed. As mentioned, I have no doubt that Prof Buhlungu was in fact the applicant’s senior and his reluctance to submit a written report boils down to insubordination. 
I am therefore satisfied that the applicant was grossly negligent and that he disobeyed an instruction from Prof Buhlungu. This conduct was furthermore not in the best interest of the respondent.
The applicant held a very senior position and he played a major role in compliance with policies. He is well educated and his conduct should have been exemplary. It is trite that the dismissal of an employee for misconduct relating to carelessness or failure to exercise due care or attention as a Senior Manager, and failure to comply with instructions, might be regarded as substantively fair.1
Gross negligence is a serious offence2 and what makes it worse in this instance is the seniority of the applicant and the position held.  
[2025] 7 BALR 784 (CCMA) at 791
It is correct that no evidence was specifically led regarding the issue of trust but it is now trite that the evidence of breakdown of the employment relationship is not required when misconduct of employee warranting inference that the trust relationship is destroyed. 3
I am satisfied that the respondent had sufficient reason to dismiss the applicant and I am also satisfied that dismissal was appropriate considering abovementioned factors. 

[6] Award
The dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair and the application is dismissed. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	Pienaar v Manzana NO and others (2016) ZALCJHB 169.
2	Netshisaulu v CCMA and others (2017) ZALCJHB 366.
3	Algoa Bus Co (Pty) Ltd v Tirisano Transport & Services Workers Union obo Mzawi and others (2025) 46 ILJ 89 (LAC) [also reported at [2024] 12 BLLR 1224 (LAC) – Ed].


End of Document