



SACCAWU obo Abrahams / Markhams [2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: CCMA, Bethlehem
Case No: FS3056-06
Date: 09/01/2007
Before: M van Aarde, Commissioner (CCMA)
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Employee walking out of disciplinary hearing after union official barred from appearing — Employer’s disciplinary code providing for representation by only employees or shop stewards — Dismissal procedurally fair.
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Derivative misconduct — Employee failing to report thefts by colleagues — Dismissal fair.
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Theft — Employee turning blind eye to persistent theft by colleagues — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, an administrative manager at one of the respondent’s stores, was dismissed, along with several colleagues, when the respondent was informed by an employee that she and other members of the staff had been stealing goods from the store. The informant blew the whistle after police raided her house and discovered stolen goods. The applicant denied involvement in the thefts, and claimed that her dismissal was procedurally unfair because an official of her union had been denied the right to appear at her disciplinary inquiry, leaving her with no option but to withdraw from the inquiry.

The commissioner noted that, under the common law, employees owe a duty of care and fidelity to their employers. This includes a duty to report misconduct committed by colleagues. The law now encourages whistle-blowing, and protects those who do. Moreover, if employers cannot identify the actual perpetrators of misconduct, they may, in appropriate circumstances, take disciplinary action against a group. This principle has also been extended to cases involving alleged poor work performance. The whistle-blower and a number of her colleagues were involved in a conspiracy to steal goods from the respondent. All the thefts had occurred in the store manager’s absence, while the applicant was in control. The applicant’s dismissal was accordingly substantively fair.

Turning to procedural fairness, the commissioner noted that employees charged with misconduct are entitled to be represented at their hearings by colleagues or by shop stewards. The company’s disciplinary code did not provide for representation by union officials not employed by the respondent. There was accordingly no basis for the applicant’s claim that she had been unfairly treated because a union official had been denied the right to represent her, and because the hearing had been held in her absence after she had walked out.

The application was dismissed and the union and/or the applicant were ordered to pay the costs of both the CCMA and the respondent.

 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 477

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

1. Details of hearing / representation

The case was set down for arbitration on 9 November 2006 and on 8–9 January 2007 at Bethlehem, Department of Labour. Ms ZM Myolwa, SACCAWU official, initially represented the applicant (“Abrahams”) at first appearance. Mr TJ Mazibuko, SACCAWU official, then took over/represented the applicant. Ms S Spencer, IR specialist, represented the respondent (“Markhams”).

2. Issue(s) to be decided
The main issue in dispute relates to the alleged unfair dismissal of the applicant in terms of section 191(1) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“LRA”). I am called upon to decide on the fairness thereof and to render an appropriate award.
During opening statements, the applicant specifically challenged the fairness of her dismissal on the following grounds:
Procedural fairness: The applicant was denied representation by an union official (“SATAWU”) at the disciplinary/appeal hearings;
Substantive fairness: The applicant denied that she committed any offence/was not guilty as to the charges at hand.

3. Background to dispute
The applicant in this matter is Ms Ellen Abrahams. She was in the employment of the respondent (Markhams, Bethlehem Store) since 7 May 1994 in the capacity of admin controller. She earned a monthly salary of R3 500.
The applicant was dismissed on 21 April 2006 for reasons of alleged misconduct, following a disciplinary/appeal hearing. Subsequently, she lodged a dispute/LRA 7.11 on 19 June 2006 (however in defect). Condonation of this late referral was granted by myself per ruling dated 11 August 2006.
The conciliation hearing was held on 7 September 2006. The parties however failed to solve the dispute and, accordingly, a certificate of non-resolution was issued in terms of section 135(5) of the LRA. The applicant then filed a request for arbitration (LRA 7.13) on 20 September 2006.
As pointed out, the case was initially set down for arbitration on 9 November 2006. The case was part heard/postponed with the consent of the parties to 8–9 January 2007 for reasons set out in my ruling dated same.
For so far as it may be relevant, I also wish to record the following:
The applicant was charged/found guilty of the following offences:

“Serious misconduct arising out of:

your failure to comply with the company stock loss action plan;
your alleged involvement in stock losses within the store resulting in a loss of 286 units over a 6-week period; 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 478
your failure to report incidents of misconduct by fellow employees which resulted in stock losses within the store.”
The respondent also submitted a bundle of documents marked Annexure A/B & C respectively, also pointing out that the disciplinary file (containing the disciplinary documents/documental evidence) got lost, hence pro forma documents submitted which will be supported by direct evidence.

4. Survey of evidence / argument
The respondent’s case
Mr HN (“Hennie”) Human testified under oath briefly as follows:
he holds the position of Senior Area Manager: Sport Division, Foshini Group and had been appointed to chair the disciplinary hearing of the applicant (and other co-employees at the Bethlehem Store);
the disciplinary hearing was scheduled on 11 April 2006 (together with co-employees Lettie Mthembu, Lerata Mokoena and Meisie Jokweni). Proper notice was served on all the said employees (Annexure A at 33);
on the day in question, the applicant arrived at the venue accompanied by an official of SATAWU. He explained to the parties that in terms of the said notice, read with the collective recognition agreement (entered into/between the Foshini Group and SACCAWU being the representative union/Annexure B), representation by an union official is not allowed. On request he adjourned the hearing of the applicant for ±90 minutes in an endeavour to arrange an alternative representative at the other branches/to coach the applicant if she decided to represent herself. There are approximately 60–70 other employees employed by the Foshini Group in Bethlehem (Foshini Store, American Swiss, Total Sports and Exact Stores);
the applicant then returned later (after 90 minutes) with another union official (“Mr TJ Mazibuko”) and they were once again explained that representation by a union official is not allowed at in-house disciplinary hearings, and specifically referred to the supporting documents which read as follows:

 “(3) you have the right─

 (a) to the assistance of a representative/a fellow employee or Shop Steward at your place of work. Not a lawyer as this is an in-house procedure, to help you state your case.”

  and

 “(2.4) All employees are entitled to have a representative to assist them at any disciplinary hearing, enquiry, performance improvement discussion or serious counselling 

 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 479

  discussion, should they so desire. Such representative may be either:

 • a Shop Steward in the same or nearby establishment or

 • a colleague in the same or nearby establishment.”


  ─ Annexure A at 34/exerpt of disciplinary code/procedure.

the applicant/representative then engaged into some argument and then decided to “walk-out”/did not attend the disciplinary hearing;
having heard the evidence (Annexure A at 13–23) he found the applicant guilty as charged and imposed a sanction of dismissal (Annexure A at 20–23/minutes of the disciplinary hearing);
in coming to his finding, he attached weight to the testimony of co-employee (“Ms Meisie Jokweni”) who directly implied the applicant to various incidents of theft. He also attached weight to the fact that the applicant already received “Letter 1 & 2” in terms of the stock loss action plan (Annexure A at 1–12) and the fact that the applicant had a “final written warning” against her name (Annexure A at 17).

Under cross-examination, Mr Human testified furthermore as follows:

he acknowledged that he did explain to the applicant/her repre-sentative why third parties cannot represent employees at in-house disciplinary hearings. Same rules are contained in the notice to attend a disciplinary hearing (Paragraph 3(a)/Annexure A at 33);
he acknowledged that after the case was postponed/adjourned he continued with the case in the absence of the applicant. He had heard direct evidence from the company’s witnesses and documental evidence had been represented to him;
according to Annexure A at 35, the store suffered a loss of 
326 units to the value of R26 800 in 6 months. The company then embarked to implement a stock loss action plan with the assistance of all the staff (Annexure A at 5–8) and took other safe-guard measures to protect the stock. Due to the fact that the stock losses were still increasing, he issued a letter 1 & 2 to the employees, including the applicant (Annexure A at 1–4);
at no time did the applicant report any incident to management and she had a “non-care” attitude towards the losses, despite attending various training courses.

In re-examination, Mr Human restated that the applicant/her representative just walked out due to the fact that he did not allow outside representation. He did warn/inform the applicant about the effect thereof/will continue in her absence [sic].

 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 480
Ms MA (“Meisie”) Jokweni testified under oath briefly as follows:
she was employed by Markhams as a flexi-worker (36 hours per month) sales person;
when confronted about the theft/goods found at her home, she decided to tell the truth/make a statement at the SAPS (Annexure A at 15–16). She also testified at the subsequent disciplinary hearing held against the applicant;
on the day in question (on/about 27–29 March 2006) she received a phone call from Mr Aubrey Millar, who implied that stolen goods were hidden at her house. She initially lied to him about the whereabouts. Later, she was confronted by the police and some stolen goods were found at her house (Levi jeans/T-shirt, cap and two bottles of perfumes/fragrances). She then decided to tell them what happened at the store. She also received an SMS from the applicant stating that she must deny everything/they must stick together then they cannot find them guilty. The applicant also advised her to state that her brother bought the goods for her/the goods were not stolen;
they were all involved in the theft which took place when the manager (“Ms Joyce Motaung”) was on leave/lunch. One day, she saw Lettie Mthembu and the applicant taking some perfume. They told her she could also take some perfume and she then took the two bottles;
on another occasion, Lettie told the applicant and herself that she was in need of a leather jacket for her boyfriend. She then took a jacket to the value of ±R740 without paying for the item. They then also invited her to take some goods. She then took the cap;
on another occasion, she was with the applicant and Lerato Mokoena. The latter was looking for jackets for her boyfriend. The applicant then stated that they must wait until Sunday (when the manager was off-duty) and Lerato took two (2) jackets. Her boyfriend arrived at the store and she gave the clothes to him without paying. She was once again invited to also take some goods. She then took a Levi jeans and T-shirt;
when customers wanted to buy some shoes, the applicant told them that the computer was off-line. She then took the money and shared it between them. She only received R50 per “deal”;
on another occasion, the applicant’s boyfriend visited the store. He took a jacket, trousers and T-shirt and after he went to the fitting-room, the applicant put the trousers and T-shirt in a Markhams bag while the boyfriend was still wearing the jacket. He left with the goods without paying for it.

  Under cross-examination, Ms Jokweni testified furthermore as follows: 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 481
 (a) she acknowledged that she made a statement to the police once they found the stolen goods at her house. She could not explain why the police did not also search the premises of the other employees;

she restated that she saw the applicants (Lettie and Lerato) on various occasions stealing goods. She acknowledged that she herself took the said goods which were found at her house;
she stated that the applicant threatened her and said that they must stick together/invited her to also take some goods;
she had a good relationship with her co-employees;
she restated that she indeed received a SMS from the applicant pointing out that she must say that her brother bought the goods for her/they must stick together.
Mr AM (“Aubrey”) Millar testified under oath briefly as follows:
he is in the employment of the respondent for the past fourteen (14) years and at present holds the position of Senior Area Manager: Markhams Division;
the applicant was appointed by Markhams as credit controller/promoter and acted as 2IC at the store;
once he got a lead/searched the house of Meisie Jokweni he approached the other co-employees. All of them denied having any knowledge of the theft/stock-losses. He then decided to suspend the employees and notices were issued to the applicant, Meisie and Lettie to attend a disciplinary hearing. He did not charge Lerato because her fixed-term contract was due to expire. He did explain the charges to each of the said employees, pointing out the issue of representation. He also referred to the recognition agreement/code of conduct (“Annexure B”);
on the day of the hearing, the applicant was accompanied by an unknown person (“union official”). He explained to them that outside representation was not allowed and the representative then requested postponement to brief/coach the applicant. Later on, the applicant arrived with Mr TJ Mazibuko (“SACCAWU official”). He once again explained to them the issue of representation. Despite his advice, they then walked out. The chairperson (“Mr Human”) then continued with the hearing in their absence;
after the applicant was dismissed, she lodged an appeal. Once again the applicant arrived with an outside person as her representative. They were again explained by the chairperson (Ms Karin Hussalman: Total Sports) that outsiders are not allowed as representatives and the appeal hearing was postponed;
Mr Eddie van der Vyver (American Swiss) was then appointed as chairperson. The applicant then requested that Mr TJ Mazibuko, SACCAWU official, represent her. The request was denied and they left; 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 482
 (g) he himself was transferred to the Free State from the Northern Cape to attend to stock losses at the Markhams Store. Stock losses at the store spiralled above the benchmark of 0.64%. He engaged into various initiatives in an endeavour to cut the losses: eg re-training of staff and implementation of an action plan. Despite these attempts, the stock losses still occurred and he issued “stock loss letters” to the staff in October 2005 and again in January 2006 (Annexure A at 1–4). In the first term, 353 units got lost to the value of R70 400 and in the second term, 526 units got lost to the value of R131 500 (total loss over a six (6) month period were 881 units to the value of R241 900);
he then got a lead/informer who told him that the staff were stealing the stock and that he must search the house of Meisie. He approached the police and obtained a search warrant. They found the stolen goods at Meisie’s house and the latter then made a statement pointing fingers at the applicant, Lettie and Lerato. The said employees, save for Lerato, were then called to a disciplinary hearing and dismissed (including Meisie). The applicant also had a “final warning” in addition to the 2 x stock letters.

  Under cross-examination, Mr Millar testified furthermore as follows:

he restated that he issued a suspension letter/notices to attend a disciplinary hearing to the three (3) said employees;
he did explain to the union representative why “outsiders” are not allowed to represent employees at in-house proceedings. He even gave them a copy of the recognition agreement;
when the applicant was issued a “final warning”, she was not represented by a union official;
he restated that the applicant and co-employees were collectively responsible for the stock losses and that she was directly implied with theft;
he is not willing to disclose the name of the informant who “opened the can”. He acknowledged that it would not have served any purpose to also search the other employees’ premises as they were notified aforehand about the lead/given the opportunity to hide the goods;
he does not believe it was also necessary to appoint a security guard as additional safeguard to prevent stock losses – he pointed out that security guards are only appointed at larger stores.
The applicant’s case
Ms Ellen Abrahams testified under oath briefly as follows:
she was in the employment of the respondent for some eleven (11) years (since 1994). She was promoted to the position of  
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 483
  credit controller in 2004. She earned a monthly salary of R3 500;
Mr Aubrey Millar issued her with a suspension letter/charge sheet. She attended the disciplinary hearing on 11 April 2006 with Mr Andries Motaung (shopsteward of SATAWU/SACCAWU and employed by Spaza Rama Supermarket). They were then informed that the latter could not represent her and they then went to the offices of SATAWU. Mr TJ Mazibuko then accompanied her to the hearing only to be informed that he was also not allowed to represent her. She believes this was unfair as her rights were denied and they then left. They were informed that she could only make use of a shopsteward/employee of the company (“Markhams”) and that the company will continue with the hearing in her absence;
she the lodged an appeal against her dismissal. She attended the appeal hearing with Mr Andries Motaung. The chairperson (“Mr Eddie van der Vyver”) then told them that the latter could not represent her and the case was postponed;
when Mr Millar suspended her (on 29 March 2006) he did call her aside and mentioned that they have found stolen goods at Meisie’s house. She was then suspended pending further investigation;
she did attend various workshops re customer services/stock control and later on received a reprimanding letter re the stock losses (Annexure A at 1–4). She also knew the code of conduct;
at no time did she ever steal any goods from the company nor did she see any co-employee taking goods. At no time did she discuss the stock losses with management nor did the company at any time, discuss the stock losses/position of the store with her;
she could not recall which union official represented her when she was issued the final written warning.

Under cross-examination, Ms Abrahams testified furthermore as follows:

she agreed that her position of credit promoter is a senior position/ position of trust;
initially, she denied that she received a notice to attend a disciplinary hearing, later corrected herself that she indeed received the suspension letter/notice;
she acknowledged that Mr Human did explain to her that an outside shopsteward/union official could not represent her at in-house hearings. Same was explained to her by Ms Karin Hussalman and Mr Eddie van der Vyver at the appeal hearings; 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 484
 (d) she acknowledged that she did receive the “stock loss letters” dated 25 October 2005 and 25 January 2006 (Annexure A at 104), but denied that management ever discussed the stock loss position of the store with her;
as to the issuing of the final written warning, she still could not remember the name of the union official who represented her (despite the fact that Mr TJ Mazibuko pointed out that he himself had represented her);
she acknowledged that she and her representative “walked away” from the disciplinary hearings because she was denied her right to be represented by Mr Motaung/Mazibuko;
she could not explain why she/her representative did not challenge the evidence of Meisie and did not know why the latter implicated her. She also could not explain why Mr Millar and Mr Human would lie at the arbitration hearing.
Ms Lettie Mthembu testified under oath briefly as follows:
she was employed by the respondent for some nine (9) years as sales lady;
she received a call on 28 March 2006, whilst on leave, from the manager who requested that she must report to the store. The next day she received a suspension letter/notice to attend a disciplinary hearing. She was also informed that Meisie’s house was searched and stolen goods were found;
the charge sheet was explained to her. She attended the hearing and represented herself because the union official was not available;
she had a good working relationship with Meisie and the other co-employees;
she denied that she ever stole any goods from the store.

  Under cross-examination, Ms Mthembu testified furthermore as follows:

she acknowledged/restated that Ms Joyce Motaung, the store manager, issued her with a suspension letter/notice and not Mr A Millar;
she also knew the rules re representation, hence she represented herself at the disciplinary hearing and subsequent arbitration hearing;
she can recall that Meisie testified at these hearings but could not recall what was said or if she asked her any questions (see case FS 3010-06, dated 11 December 2006 per commissioner M Louw);
she only became aware of the stock losses once she was charged/ dismissed;
she also could not recall that she was issued a written warning for “arguing/fighting” with the applicant (despite the fact that  
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 485
  the document was put to the witness/document dated 17 June 2005);
she denied that she was part of the ‘concert’/stole goods from the store.
Ms ML (“Lerato”) Mokoena testified under oath briefly as follows:
she was employed by the respondent for some 1,4 years as contract worker/casual in sales;
she did not attend any disciplinary hearing and her contract was not renewed. She did lodge a dispute at the CCMA under case number FS 2962-06, dated 4 September 2006. Her application was unsuccessful;
she does not want to harm the applicant as they have a good relationship/ “does not want to talk bad about her”;
she explained the procedure re storage/selling of shoes and pointed out that it is not possible for a customer to enter the store room/take shoes. She does not know who stole the shoes in question. She did not do it.
Mr Andries Motaung testified under oath briefly as follows:
he is in the employment of Spaza Rama Supermarket, a privately own business. He is also a member of SACCAWU;
the applicant approached him requesting him to represent her;
on their arrival at the hearing, the chairlady (“Ms Karen Hussalman”) informed him that he cannot represent the applicant. He only represented the applicant once.

  In cross-examination Mr Motaung testified furthermore as follows:

he acknowledged that he assisted the applicant only once at an appeal hearing and that the chairperson, Ms K Hussalman (not Mr E van der Vyver), informed him about the rules of representation;
he acknowledged that he was informed that he was not allowed to represent the applicant.

5. Analysis of evidence / argument

Having heard the (closing) arguments of both parties, I will address the material issues separately.

5.1 Onus of proof

The onus to prove the fairness of a dismissal dispute rests on the employer’s party/respondent (section 192(2) of the LRA). The proof required is on a balance of probabilities.

5.2 Procedural fairness: Representation at disciplinary hearings
The applicant’s main argument is that she was “denied her legal right to be represented by an union official of her own choice”. Mr Mazibuko has taken this argument further, arguing that at the  
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 486
  workplace, only two employees are members of SATAWU/SACCAWU, hence it was difficult for the applicant to arrange for a shopsteward or co-employee to represent her. He relied heavily on the dicta in NUMSA v Transvaal Pressed Nuts, Bolts and Rivets (Pty) Ltd (1988) 9 ILJ 457 (IC) (sic).
In terms of Schedule 8, item 4(1) and (2):
an employee is allowed to be assisted by a trade union representative or fellow employee at disciplinary hearings (item 4(1)); and
before disciplinary action is taken against a shopsteward, the union must first be informed/consulted (item 4(2)).

  In terms of section 213, a “trade union representative” means a member of a trade union who is elected to represent employees at the workplace. A “trade union representative” in this context means an elected shop steward (either part-time or full-time) and excludes union officials and legal practitioners (being third parties to the direct employee/employer relationship). The reason is obvious: internal disciplinary proceedings must be dealt with the minimum of legal formalities.

Secondly, I feel obliged to point out that Mr Mazibuko, with respect, clearly misguided him with the dicta in NUMSA v Transvaal Pressed Nuts, Bolts & Rivets (Pty) Ltd (1988) 9 ILJ 457 (IC). In the specific case, De Villiers SC/member clearly stated that “a union has no clear right to demand representation by officials for members at disciplinary hearings unless agreed upon to the contrary” and “that a general bar on such representatives does not amount to an unfair labour practice”. The learned author came to this conclusion after he had analysed the case law at hand. In final analysis he relied on MAWU v IA Bell Equipment Co (unreported) dated 24 September 1986, where the following was held:

“Moreover (it was submitted) he should have been entitled to be represented by trade union officials at the enquiries conducted into both of these alleged offences. The company document headed “disciplinary procedure for all scheduled employees with effective date 1 January 1985” was on of the exhibits. It provides that the employee has the right to be represented by an employee representative who must be a fellow employee. There is no reference to representation by a trade union official. Although it might be in appropriate circumstances be commendable industrial relations practice for an employer to permit an employee to be represented by a trade union official, particularly if the employee is a shop steward or office-bearer in the union, even though the union is not formally recognized by the employer, it does not appear to the court that this is a clear right of an employee, whether office-bearer, shop steward or ordinary member of a union. It is only where a recognition agreement provides specifically for such representation that there would be a clear right in the employee to be so represented.”

See also Wahl v AECI Ltd (1983) 4 ILJ 298 (IC) read with ILO Convention 119 of 1963: Termination of Employment Recommendation. This position has not since changed. 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 487
I also cannot agree with Mr Mazibuko’s contention that in the specific circumstances the applicant was one of two employees/members and could not easily have arranged for another person to represent her, save for a union official (or outsider). The rules of the company are quite clear and the applicant in fact had a choice of other employees (60–70) within the group of companies at Bethlehem. In fact, the applicant/her representative was at least on four occasions advised about her rights, but nevertheless decided not to attend the hearings. In this regard, I am guided by Gemini Indent Agencies CC t/a S & A Marketing v CCMA (1999) 20 ILJ 2872 (LC) where it was held that in circumstances alike, an employee cannot ex post facto claim procedural unfairness.

  – See also L Mthembu v Foshini (2006): case number FS 3010-06, dated 11 December 2006, where a similar approach was held by commissioner M Louw.

5.3 Substantive fairness
re Charge 1: Stock losses: Collective guilt
Firstly, I must point out that in common law, there rests a general duty on employees to act with fidelity and due care towards the interest of its employer. Failure to follow suit amounts to a form of dishonesty/breach of trust which is destructive of the employment relationship. See Standard Bank of South Africa v CCMA (1998) 18 ILJ 903 (LC)1 and County Fair Foods (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & others (1999) 20 ILJ 1701 (LAC).2
These duties, bestowed upon employees by common law also include that it is incumbent on employees to (timeously) speak up and to report any irregularities that comes to his/her knowledge or, as in the present circumstances, could reasonably have been expected to come to his/her knowledge. See BMW (SA) (Pty) Ltd v Van der Walt (2000) 21 ILJ 113 (LAC).3
In fact, our legislator has now adopted legislation to protect these so-called whistle-blowers (“splitters”) in terms of section 3 of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000. The purpose of this legal protection also justifies a difference in approach/application of disciplinary measures in favour of the whistle-blower – if that was not the case, there would be no motivation/incentive for an employee to blow the whistle/open the can of worms (and in doing so, incriminate him-/herself). The whistle-blower is thus entitled to protection by means of indemnity. See Grieve v Denel (Pty) Ltd (2003) (unreported) case number C7/03,  
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 488
  dated 16 January 2003,4 where Pillemer AJ held that the said Act:

  “. . . seems to encourage a culture of whistle blowing and to create a culture which will facilitate the disclosure of information by employees relating to criminal and other irregular conduct in the workplace by also providing protection against any reprisals as a result of such disclosures.”

  See also FEDCRAW obo Selepe & others v Snip Trading (Pty) Ltd (2003) case number FS 4666-02 (CCMA).

In Chauke & others v Lee Service Centre CC t/a Leeson Motors (1998) 19 ILJ 1441 (LAC),5 the Labour Appeal Court, per Cameron JA (as he then was), held that in circumstances where an employer is not in the position to identify the perpetrators, it is justifiable to hold the group of employees collectively responsible. The court based its decision on the fact that it is either a derivative violation of trust and confidence or the evidential inference of a positive involvement of a co-employee. The employees thus culpably participated in a “campaign” (or “scheme”) and share the responsibility of misconduct committed.
In Council for Scientific & Industrial Research v Fijen (1996) 17 ILJ 18 (A)6 the Appeal Court restated the importance of the underlying common law-duties within the context of our labour law. The court held at 26D–E as follows:

  “Where a worker has or may reasonably be supposed to have information concerning the guilty, his or her failure to come forward with the information may itself amount to misconduct. The relationship between employer and employee is in its essentials one of trust and confidence, and, even at common law, conduct clearly inconsistent with that essential warranted termination of employment. Failure to assist an employer in bringing the guilty to book violates this duty and may itself justify dismissal.”

And in FAWU & others v ABI Ltd (1994) 15 ILJ 1057 (LAC)7 the Labour Appeal Court (in re a case where a large group of workers assaulted a “scab” driver/severely injured) held, per Nugent J, as follows:

  “In the field of industrial relations, it may be that policy considerations require more of an employee than that he merely remained passive in circumstances like the present, and that his failure to assist in an investigation of this sort may in itself justify disciplinary action.”

 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 489
Our labour tribunals, furthermore, expand the above principles (relating to actions of misconduct) to actions of poor performance especially relating to stock losses/shrinkage and/or to achieve certain performance standards in circumstances where the cause of non-achievement could not be linked to a single factor or a particular individual.
In F Mkhwanzi & 2 others / Pep Stores (Pty) Ltd unreported case number KN35074/7, March 2000, commissioner Jenlan stated that the dismissal can be justified when:
acts/omissions constituting poor work performance have been committed by individuals in the group;
that the respondent has acted reasonably in identifying the group of applicants who could have under-performed and that each member of the group was individually capable of doing so;
that as between the members of the group the respondent could not reasonably identify the individuals causing the required standard not to be met;
the respondent has made a sufficiently thorough in-vestigation to establish the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of the group;
the respondent has given individual applicants in the group appropriate evaluation, instruction, training, guidance or counselling and a reasonable time to improve;
the applicants in the group were aware or could reasonably be expected to have been aware of the required group performance standard;
the group performance standard is reasonable and achievable;
the applicants were given a fair opportunity to meet the required performance standard and continue to perform unsatisfactory;
the applicants have been given the right to be heard and to be assisted;
dismissal is an appropriate sanction for not meeting the required standard.
See also SACCAWU & others v Cashbuild Ltd (1996) 4 BLLR 457 (IC); SACCAWU v Pep Stores (1998) 18 ILJ 939 (CCMA);8 SACTWU obo Motaung & others / Pep Stores (2001), case number FS 19142,9 which held a similar approach. 
[2007] 5 BALR 476 (CCMA) at 490
Lastly, I must also point out that I cannot align myself with Mr Mazibuko’s contention that the applicant had no knowledge of the vast stock losses. In fact, the applicant contradicted herself on various occasions. I fail to understand how she could not have any knowledge of the increasing stock losses and/or denied that management ever discussed this burning issue with her/the staff in circumstances where:
she attended all the renewed training sessions re stock losses;
she attended staff meetings;
she received two letters to the same effect?
re Charges 2 & 3: Theft/failure to report theft to management
From the outset, I must point out that the applicant/her representative never challenged the direct evidence of Ms Meisie Jokweni where she:
directly implicated the applicant to theft;
pointed out that the applicant send her a SMS to “cover up the theft”.
There is no doubt in my mind that the applicant, together with Meisie, Lettie and Lerato formed part of the concert/scam to steal goods at the store. Such theft usually took place when the store manager (“Joyce Motaung”) was not at the store, and, the applicant being the 2IC was the only supervisor present. The applicant was placed in a position of trust, which she bluntly failed to carry out.
I cannot agree with Mr Mazibuko’s contention that it was unfair for the employer/respondent to only search the house of Meisie once they got the lead and/or that Meisie was forced by the police to make statements and/or that once she was caught red-handed, she decided to frame the applicant/other co-employees. Firstly, Ms Meisie Jokweni was a flexi-time worker who only worked 36 hours per month – the stock losses also occurred whilst she was not at the store. Secondly, no pressure was placed on the said witness at this arbitration hearing – her testimony is in line with what she had said/put in the affidavit, testified at the disciplinary hearing(s) and at the arbitration hearing of Ms Lettie Mhtembu (see arbitration award FS 3010-06, dated 11 December 2006, per commissioner M Louw). Lastly, I fail to understand why would Ms Jokweni incriminate herself in circumstances where she had nothing to gain/can be criminally charged?

5.4 Cost

Ms Spencer, lastly, argued that I must render a cost order against the applicant/SATAWU in terms of section 139(2) of the LRA. I am also of 

the opinion that they acted in a frivolous/vexatious manner to proceed with this (last) case, well knowing that the merits of the case are not good (also considering the findings of the other commissioners re the other employees involved). As pointed out, I did not find the applicant to be a reliable witness – she contradicted herself on various occasions which I do not deem it necessary to dwell into any further. I am thus of the opinion that a cost order is justified in the specific circumstances.

6. Award

In case FS 3056-06, the following award is rendered:

I find the dismissal of the applicant to be both procedurally and substantively fair.
The applicant and SATAWU are hereby jointly and severely ordered to pay the cost as follows:
to the CCMA:   R6 940
cost to the respondent, including travelling cost incurred to defend this application. Cost to be calculated at CCMA rates and the respondent must submit a detail schedule of cost for taxation.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	 Also reported at [1998] 6 BLLR 622 (LC) – Ed.
2	 Also reported at [1999] 11 BLLR 1117 (LAC) – Ed.
3	 Also reported at [2000] 2 BLLR 121 (LAC) – Ed.
4	 Reported at [2003] 4 BLLR 366 (LC) – Ed.
5	 Also reported at [1998] JOL 3076 (LAC) – Ed.
6	 Also reported at [1996] 6 BLLR 685 (A) – Ed.
7	 Also reported at [1994] 12 BLLR 25 (LAC) – Ed.
8	 Also reported at [1998] 6 BALR 719 (CCMA) – Ed.
9	 Reported at [2001] 8 BALR 905 (CCMA) – Ed.


End of Document