



Niyitunga / University of Johannesburg [2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission For Conciliation, Mediation And Arbitration
Case No: GAJB25412-24
Date: 19/09/2025
Before: JW Thee, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Fraud — Lecturer signing off student’s first class mark knowing that she had not written exam — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a senior lecturer, was dismissed for approving the final examination mark of a student who he knew had not written the exam, enabling her to be admitted to a master’s programme. The applicant claimed that he had reported the matter as soon as he became aware that the student had not written the exam and denied that he had had a “cosy” relationship with her. 

The Commissioner accepted that the applicant was responsible for verifying the exam results as an assessor, and that by signing the result he had certified their correctness. Had the applicant reconciled the scripts with the attendance register he would have known immediately that the student had not written the examination. His claim that he was entitled to change borderline marks was contradicted by his own witness. The university’s evidence, which was clear, consistent and credible, showed that the applicant had failed to exercise his responsibility as a lecturer to ensure that the marks were accurate before signing them off. He had given the student a mark of 75%, which should have been zero. The claim by the applicant and some of his witnesses that he had exposed fraud on the part of the administrator and students is mind-boggling and plainly orchestrated. According to the criteria set out in the new Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, the applicant’s misconduct was serious and could have compromised the university’s integrity and reputation. He had shown no remorse, and further training and counselling would serve no purpose. Dismissal was warranted.

The referral was dismissed. 

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
This is the award in the arbitration between Dr Eric Niyitunga, the applicant, and the University of Johannesburg (“UJ”), the respondent.
The arbitration hearing took place on 5 June and 29 and 30 July and 2 and 3 September 2025 at the CCMA offices in Johannesburg. 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1323
The applicant was present and he was represented by Mr Nabeel Noorbhai from Noorbhai Attorneys. 
The respondent was represented by the Ms Loraine J Philips an Attorney from Philips Attorneys. 
The arbitration proceedings were conducted in English and were digitally recorded on the Javs system and my personal device. 

Discovery of documents
The parties submitted their respective bundle of documents that purported to be what they represented. 

Issues to be decided
I must decide whether the applicant’s dismissal was procedurally and substantively fair. 
The applicant asked to be retrospectively reinstated. 

Background to the dispute
The applicant started working for respondent on 1 July 2016. He held the position as a Senior Lecturer and earned R98 850,19 per month.
The dispute arose when a student (“Lechesa”) passed an examination with a 74% pass rate without writing the examination. Following an investigation, it was discovered that the responsible lecturer (“applicant”) did not follow the protocols in terms of the verification process and the contents thereof and by breaching the standard operating procedures and assessment policy. As a result of the omission by the lecturer the student was admitted to the Master’s Programme.
The applicant was notified on 12 June 2024 to attend a disciplinary hearing on the charge as follows. 

Charges 1 and 2 

Gross misconduct and/or gross negligence in that you breached the 2023 regulations, assessment policy and standard operating procedures for assessment. 

It is alleged that on or about 9 November 2023, you approved and signed the final examination sheet for PMG8XO4 (Advanced Human Resource Management) without verifying the contents thereof, which resulted in you signing and approving a mark of 74% for student Lorraine Nolwazi Lechesa, who you were aware did not write the exam on 30 October 2023. 
Your actions and/or omission resulted in the student obtaining a final pass mark for the PMG8X04 module fraudulently which led to her acceptance into the MA in Public Management, Governance and Public Policy Programme for 2024. 
The applicant was dismissed on 29 September 2023. Aggrieved by his dismissal, he referred a dispute to the CCMA on 25 October 2025. A conciliation hearing was held on 12 November 2025 but the dispute remained 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1324

  unresolved and a certificate to such effect was issued. The applicant requested on 16 January 2025 that the dispute be resolved through arbitration. [Dates as per award – Ed.]

Survey of the evidence and argument

The respondent’s case 
Ms Thea Tselepis testified as follows. She is a Professor and Vice Dean responsible for teaching and learning in the College for Business Economics. She has been the Chair of the College for research since 2020. She is in charge of six schools within the department which accommodates twenty eight thousand students. Her principals are responsible for implementation of programmes which starts with the accreditation with the South African Qualification Authority (“SAQA”) to ensure that requirements are met. 
She explained the process for verification in detail which included the admission of assignments which is signed by the student. In circumstances where a big group exists, markers are appointed to mark the assignments. They are required to capture and balance the marks and once the marks are captured they are signed off and it would be highlighted on the system and only academics may do so. A high level checking exercise is conducted prior to the release of marks by the faculty. The lecturer responsible for the verification looks at the success rate which is followed by auditing. The process is always done on Excel and is not allowed on Word documents. The respondent has always been very serious about the auditing trail. Generally it is the assistants, administrators, associate lecturers who have access to the system for capturing purposes, including Rexton Maluleke [sic]. 
She emphasised that there is a big difference between verification and capturing and everybody is required to sign. The applicant had access to the system. Whenever marks are captured the scripts must be checked such as the marks, student number on the list together with the semester marks. It is all about balancing the numbers. The person who is capturing is responsible. In the present case the group was not big and if any changes were made, they had to be verified with the moderator. Three hundred students is not a huge group and must be checked or verified. The role of the faculty is merely administrative and it looks at the success rate and at whether the student is paid up for the studies and, if not, the results are not released. 
She referred to the mark sheet in the bundle of the management system from where a report would be generated. The report shows the semester marks versus the final mark. She denied that the marks could be amended. She referred to the final mark sheet from Maluleke, the administrator. She would be surprised if the person is only interested in the last column of the examination sheet. The student name, date, time and marks would be generated. The director signs on the examination sheet electronically. The applicant would be required to sign to confirm whether he agreed with the information on the sheet. He signed to confirm whether the student was present or on a break. She referred to the assessment policy which was approved by the Senate which is the highest level and read the purpose of the policy into the record of the proceedings. She referred to the exit model as part of the qualification and whether the student was ready for graduation. 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1325
She read into the record of the proceedings the applicable policies related to the assessment; standard operating principles for faculties; the verification procedure required; and the procedural guidelines for assessment at faculty level; and the role of the assessor contained in the bundle of documents. She further read that once the marking process is complete, the assessor is responsible for ensuring that the results are captured in the mark sheet; marks awarded for each question or assessment activity are reconciled with the total marks awarded for the question paper or activity; and that the total marks awarded are reconciled with the mark sheet. She rejected the notion that no audit exists. He had to follow the prescribed steps as outlined because the system is in place to ensure verification is done properly. He is not in a position to simply go through the papers. She referred to the bundle and read the Standard Operating Procedures. 
Reckson Maluleke (“RM”) sent an email to the applicant about the signed final examination mark sheet, dated 9 November 2023, within plus minus ten days from marking. The examination was written on 30 October 2023. She referred to the applicant’s Affidavit with reference to the issue that the student Lechesa, was injured and unable to write the examination. However, ten days after that she received the marks. The applicant knew that the marks should not have been on the mark sheet. He knew that she was not present at the examination, which was extremely odd. She questioned why would he signed for a student who was not present at the examination. 
She referred to WhatsApp communications between the applicant and the student. She found the engagements to be very cosy. He assisted her for her Masters Citation. The applicant asked her to send more articles which was a clear indication of his supervisory role. It was a clear indication that she was going to do her Masters with the assistance of the applicant. A sixty percent average mark is required to advance to the Master’s Programme. She could not be accepted if she did not meet the requirements for a Master’s programme. An application is not a formal process or a casual engagement. She answered in the affirmative that the applicant knew that the student did not write the examination. He had a clear intention to supervise her into the Master’s programme. The requirements for special examinations provides for grounds related to ill health. For the semester examinations, the criteria is different where students could liaise directly with their lecturers.
Medical certificates are valid as well as exceptional circumstances would be acceptable such as that the student is not in a state of mind to write an examination. Administrative processes would be followed in cases related to modules where students did not meet the requirements. She questioned whether the student still needed a proposal because it was rather strange that she was admitted and what were the grounds stated. She needed a strong proposal to ensure that she got admitted. The applicant knew she was admitted without writing any examination. She argued that a reasonable person would have asked on what grounds was she admitted. 
She testified that his Affidavit, dated 5 February 2024, shows that he knew about the student admission as she requested to be supervised by him. His personal statement was not aligned to the student’s version and was a contradiction. She described his statement as untruthful. The applicant’s 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1326

  questioning of her admission was nothing but a smoke screen pretending that he was unaware of her admission. She contended that if the applicant was a true whistle blower, he would have asked the right questions. His version cannot be accepted as plausible. She was of the opinion that the applicant simply covered his tracks when he brought Tasneem into the picture. 

She argued that the real whistle blowing started when the students disclosed the irregularity about the marks. The Director, Professor Dominique, was aware of this in January 2024. The applicant positioned himself as a whistle blower whilst he was fully aware of the incident. The evidence shows that he had a close relationship with the student. He failed to ask questions about her being admitted. She referred to a paragraph in relation to her not writing the main examination and her not being in attendance. She replied that she would explain, suggesting once again that the applicant knew about it. The student’s case was finalised at a disciplinary hearing and a sanction of expulsion was instituted against her for a period of ten years.
A criminal case was laid against Reckson Maluleke. The lecturer was supposed to have picked it up during the verification process. The student nearly graduated and in the meantime she managed to register for the Master’s programme, whilst other students were not accommodated. The Master’s Programme would have started in February 2025. The trust relationship had been broken. The Registrar (“RM”) could not trust the lecturer who supervised any person who did not qualify. The incident caused reputational damage and the credibility of the institution and its qualification were at risk. 
Under cross-examination, she testified as follows. She provided an overview of the school of Public Administration activities. She became aware of the incident in 2023, when it was alleged that marks were sold. She entered the frame during November 2023. Professor Ben Marks was initially involved when the incident first emerged. Her involvement was limited. She was not directly involved in marking. She received her knowledge of the procedure for administrative duties. 
She accepted that she received her training from others in the institution. She was involved in the scripts. The students spoke to her directly and she thereafter briefed the Dean about the alleged incident. She was instructed by the Registrar’s office to get involved. Professor Dominique was instrumental in the process. Recently a similar incident came to light and was uncovered through a verification process. Initially the reports were hearsay evidence. 
Subsequently five students approached her office who were not able to graduate. They initially went to the lecturer who was not helpful and then approached her. Some of the students felt that they were unfairly treated. Professor Dominique, the Head of Department ,had access to the system but he could not change the marks. The faculty could not change the marks. If an individual made a mistake he/she could report the matter and call for an intervention. She argued that a person cannot verify a result if he/she does not have a script. She accepted that Reckson Maluleke could change the information but that it was unlikely. She testified that there is no 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1327

  automatic right or wrong and she argued that the lecturer should take responsibility. She became aware when it was brought to her attention that the scripts were stolen. Professor Sihka hinted to her that something was wrong and the applicant also alluded to it.

The only person who could edit the sheets was Professor Ozay. The only issue was whether the applicant had verified the scripts. The applicant conceded that he only looked at the last page of the examination sheet but signed for the full document. Generally if she sees a distinction it would be alarming but when she looked for adjustments it was a totally different scenario if it was 70% plus. Professor Dominique kept a record of the files. 
She was not persuaded that it was an error or that something went wrong. Her contention was that in January 2025, Maluleke could not have changed it, as it would not make any difference. He forwarded the email after he had signed. The mark sheet was the same in February as it was in November 2024. The student alleged a sexual harassment case against the applicant. She volunteered the WhatsApp messages in support of her claim. 
The respondent did not pursue the case against the applicant. The student’s defence was to conveniently conduct a smear campaign against the Lecturer. Accountability was key and was not negotiable. She did not doubt the applicant’s academic credentials and knew that he was an excellent researcher. The role of the lecturer is to check as part of his responsibility because he gets paid for it. The system highlights exceptional cases. 
The applicant’s mistake was that he granted the marks and signed it off. He knew that the student did not qualify for a degree. She got a distinction without writing an examination. She acknowledged that systems are never perfect and that they are driven by humans. She repeated that the applicant did not probe whether the student actually wrote an examination or how she was admitted to the Master’s programme. He knew she did not write the examination. He cared because he called her. The fact that the student was expelled for ten years is sad but justice must prevail. 
Under re-examination she testified that, it was not an easy issue when informed about the incident. This was not a character attack against the applicant. The applicant was an expert in his field. The student’s conduct was fraudulent. 

The applicant’s case
The applicant (“Niyitunga”) testified as follows. He joined the University of Johannesburg (“UJ”) during 2023. He is a senior lecturer in the School of Governance. He confirmed that he understood the charges as per the charge sheet levelled against him. He followed the internal procedures and did not dispute the respondent’s witness’ version about it. He agreed that the lecturer must check the examination sheet for any errors. 
He is obliged to check the student number and whether the student is in attendance on the register. The verification starts at this point. He counted the scripts himself and verified the attendance register. The attendance list was in the possession of Reckson Maluleke (“administrator”) He found no discrepancies. He took the script and started to mark. Reckson Maluleke 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1328

  (“RM”) brought the script to AL to ensure that it corresponded with the total marks allocated. He left with documents in his possession. The lecturer did not have access to the system. 

The administrator (“RM”) captured the information. He thereafter sent the spread sheet to him which contained the marks. It showed the borderline marks or those who achieved distinctions. He found that there were no borderline cases. He signed the spread sheet and returned it to the administrator. Once the administrator satisfied himself with the papers they were referred to the Head of Department. In 2022, he was questioned why he sent the spreadsheet to the administrator and he said it was the practice. He referred to the email from Janse Van Vuuren, dated on 3 February 2023, about the verification of marks that was addressed to Professor Dominque that further stated that the lecturer did not have access to the system. 
He confirmed that the documents could be edited. However, the responsibilities were taken away from the lecturers. He questioned the system during 2022 and 2023. He knew that the student was conditionally accepted. He was assigned as her lecturer during the third year. He confirmed that the student approached him for supervision for the Master’s programme. Her boyfriend also approached him for his PHD supervision. He became aware that she was not present at the supplementary examination. He called her to establish her whereabouts and her reason for being absent from the examination. She told him that she had been admitted. It took him by surprise being aware of her weaknesses. He discovered that she was actually admitted masters [sic]. He went to Tasneem and explained the situation to her. He could not understand how she could have been admitted to masters. He requested the scripts from the Administrator. Tasneem told him to call the student and put her on speaker. He brought in two other witnesses to listen to the conversation. He raised the issue about her not being at the examination, but that she was awarded marks. She replied it would be sorted out. He asked how it would be sorted out, and she replied that she would explain when they met. 
He went to the administrator’s office to collect the script. The administrator (“RM”) was very rude and aggressive towards him. He reminded him that he was once his student. He called him a makwerekwere (“illegal foreigner”). The student confessed to him that RM assisted her. RM called her to tell her not to disclose anything because he (“applicant”) is a perfectionist. She paid him R2 000 to keep quiet. He called Reckson Maluleke (“RM”) to see him. He initially resisted seeing him but then calmed down. He explained to RM that UJ gave him an opportunity, and that he could not afford competition as a refugee. RM was in a fighting mood. RM then suggested that the two of them move to the parking bay because students were in the vicinity. He tried to extract information from him as they walked towards the parking bay as a strategy. Upon their arrival at the parking Reckson Maluleke (“RM”) apologised to him in a harsh tone. 
He gave the student the script which was backdated. He kept quiet and told him to go to Professor Dominique because it was an academic offence. He reported the incident to Professor Dominque. He did not have the script and if it was the case, he could have verified it, but because of the practice it 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1329

  was not possible. Professor Dominique would come and testify in support of his version. The student only admitted that she did not write the examination once he confronted her. He forgot to put the student’s version in his Affidavit, in what he termed human error. The same student implicated him in a sexual harassment case. He was suspended but UJ did not pursue the case against him. He thought that it was a set up. The system is not a robot and corruption and fraud must be rooted out and change must happen.

Under cross-examination, he testified and conformed his job status as a senior lecturer and that it was a high position at UJ. He confirmed that it was his signature on the examination sheet and that RM sent him an email, dated 5 February 2024, at 9:20am. He confirmed that the student received a mark of 74%. He accepted that the procedure must be followed. A proposition was put to him that the lecturer was responsible and he replied that he signed off on the accuracy of the mark sheet. He conceded that he did not verify the mark sheet. He conceded that the verification was his responsibility. 
He could not ask RM for the script and when he did ask, he was told it fell within the power of Corporate Affairs, and that it was in the storeroom. He repeated that the information was not given to him. He confirmed that he called Tasneem as a witness at the disciplinary hearing. He considered factors such as performance of the student and contribution during lectures. He agreed with Tasneem’s version at the hearing with her permission on the borderline cases. He then changed his testimony and said that he could not remember her version at the hearing. In response to the proposition that the student got 74% [sic], he agreed that he only looked at the final mark. He contended that the policy states that he must only look at border-line cases and not who got distinctions. 
He disputed that it was his signature on the examination sheet. He agreed that the PDF document is not legible but the Excel spread sheet could be changed. He agreed that RM could change it but that it was not possible because he had to stamp it. He was questioned about an email that had no address on it following his dismissal and he replied that witnesses name was not mentioned in the original email. 
He could not elaborate on whether the document was edited. He denied that he had a close relationship with the student. He was equally shocked when she was admitted to masters. He denied that he had a soft approach towards the student. He disputed that Tasneem was just a lecturer but a senior in her position. He agreed that he was Tasneem’s senior as a lecturer. He denied that he approached Tasneem because she was a weak target. RM called him and threatened him that he was going to kill him when he was under pressure. He became very violent when he heard that he was going to report the matter. He confirmed that the student was expelled. He could not remember where the documents came from that contained privileged information. 
Under re-examination, he testified that he was never charged for negligence but the issue was that he had not reported the incident. It was not his proposal to scrutinise people. He was not charged for sexual harassment. He was subsequently charged on the current charges. In his view this is a demonstration that UJ has a faulty system. Therefore, he became reluctant 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1330

  to reveal names of people or include sensitive information in the evidence pack. Hence his reason for not disclosing certain information or its origin. Dr Dominique was unaware of the documents.

Professor Dominique Uwizevimna testified as follows. He is the Director of the School of Governance and the Head of the Administration and thirteen academics report to him. He was the applicant’s Line Manager until his dismissal. He had an office at the Soweto campus. Tasneem is the sub-head and a lecturer for nine years. 
He explained the examination process as follows: once the examination is done a script becomes available and is taken for marking. Once the marking is completed it gets taken for capturing and then the verification process follows. Two invigilators assist with the process and their role is to ensure that the capturing is properly done. Thereafter the marks are taken to the administrator (“RM”) for verification for students on border line cases such as 38% and 39% of the marks and those students who got close to distinctions at 73% and 74% of the marks. Once the relevant people have signed the script it goes to the administrator. He questioned the understanding of adding or reducing percentages in the final marks. 
He argued that the Head of the Department always added his/her signature. The practice was always the same to ensure efficiency and effectiveness. He learned about the applicant’s suspension. He was not asked about his opinion, despite the fact that he had been part of many investigations. He asked the question why he was not involved but was not given an answer. He contended that the applicant did what any other lecturer did. Every one interpreted the practices all along. He is governed by the policy guidelines. He used the scenario of a traffic cop to justify his response. He contended that the applicant followed due processes. The June examination was considered for an upgraded programme. He was aware of the ongoing investigation. He told RM (“administrator”) not to access the examinations because he had full access to it. It was alleged that he gave money to students. He did not testify at the disciplinary hearing. 
Under cross-examination he testified as follows. He confirmed his understanding of the internal process. He was aware of the email communication issue. He denied that he gave it to the applicant. He restated that the applicant complied with the policies. He confirmed the levels of discipline in the organisation. He requested deviation and that the Dean supported it. The scripts were kept far away from the venue. He accepted that the Council is the highest structure. 
Mkululi Qacula testified as follows. He is an administrative assistant. He worked together with the applicant. He knows Tasneem, the Operations Manager and he reported to her at some stage. He testified that they were heading on their way to the seminar with the applicant, Tasneem and Dr Joel. 
The applicant made a call to the student. He asked her why she did not write the examination and he questioned the fact that she was admitted to the Master’s programme. She replied that she would tell him once they met. He overheard the conversation because the phone was on the speaker mode. 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1331

  The applicant became aware that the student did not write. He was very inquisitorial about what happened and why. 

Under cross-examination he explained his understanding of the examination procedure. He has no understanding of the lecturer’s verification process. He did not testify at the hearing. He restated that they were heading towards the seminar with the staff, Tasneem and the applicant. He could not recall what they were talking about. No meeting was convened and he was not called to a meeting. The applicant arrived and was looking for Dr Tasneem Majam. He said that she was available. He did not hear the content of the discussions in the office. 
The applicant made the call and he recognised the voice of the student. He said to her that she did not write the examination, and asked how was she admitted to the Master’s programme. The seminar lasted the full day. The applicant left after the event. He was shown the WhatsApp messages of the conversations between the applicant and the student. He was unaware that the applicant and the student had previous WhatsApp conversations. He was unaware about the reasons for her not writing the examination. He assumed based on the chat that the student was admitted to masters. 
Under re-examination he testified that he became aware of the issue on the 5th but initially when the applicant received the call. The student was a tutor at the Soweto campus. He was aware of rumours doing the rounds.
Carmen Joel testified as follows. She is a lecturer and worked with the applicant together since 2018. They attended the seminar and were walking together. The applicant made a call to the student. She became aware that she did not write the examination and if that was the case, she should have failed the examination. She was a witness at the disciplinary proceedings. 
Under cross-examination she testified that she is not a senior lecturer and that the applicant was senior to her. She confirmed that the applicant called the student and asked her why she did not write the supplementary examination. She was unaware of the call from the applicant to the student. [Sic.] She was unaware of the other communications between the applicant and the student. She agreed that the student could not have entered the Master’s Programme if she did not write the examination. She was not aware of the WhatsApp messages between them. She would have informed her Head of Department that the student did not write the exam but was admitted to masters. 

Closing arguments
I acknowledge the arguments that were submitted by both parties. I would only take into consideration the submissions that are relevant to the issue to be determined where materially relevant and if so, I would deal with it in my analysis of evidence and arguments. 

Analysis of evidence and argument
Section 188(2) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 as amended (“the Act”) provides that any person considering whether or not the reason for dismissal is a fair reason or whether or not the dismissal was effected in 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1332

  accordance with a fair procedure must take into account any relevant Code of Good Practice issued in terms of the Act.

I am required to determine whether the applicant’s dismissal was substantively fair. In Assmang Ltd v CCMA (JR2584/2012) [2015] ZALCJHB [2015] 6 BLLR 589 (LC) [2015] 36 ILJ 2203 (LC), the Court confirmed where an employer chooses to dismiss an employee for reasons relating to misconduct, the employer bears the onus to prove that the dismissal was fair. 
The onus to prove that the applicant’s dismissal was fair is based on a balance of probabilities (“BOP”). The test on a balance of probabilities was explained in the case of Govan v Skidmore 1952 (1) SA 732 (N) as follows:

“It is trite law in general, that in making findings and inferences in a civil case, that the court may go on a mere preponderance of probabilities, even though in doing so, it does not exclude every reasonable doubt, so that one may, by balancing probabilities select a conclusion, which seems to be more natural, or plausible conclusion from amongst several conceivable ones, even though that conclusion may not be the only reasonable one”. 

Furthermore, I am guided by the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal (“the Code) that must be taken into account on whether a dismissal was fair by evaluating the following factors:
whether there was a rule or standard, and if so whether the rule or standard was contravened, 
whether the rule was reasonable,
whether the employee was aware or could reasonably have been expected to have been aware of the rule or standard,
whether the rule or standard has been consistently applied and, 
whether dismissal was an appropriate sanction for the contravention of the rule. 
In the case of Masilela v Leonard Dingler (Pty) Ltd [2004] 4 BLLR 381 (LC) on page 390G and further, where Judge Francis stated: 

“This Court is faced with two mutually destructive versions, only one of which is correct. In deciding which version to accept and which one to reject, I am obliged to consider inter alia the issue on a balance of probabilities. The onus is on the respondent to prove on a balance of probabilities that its version is the truth. The onus is discharged if the respondent can show by credible evidence that its version is the more probable and acceptable version. The credibility of the witnesses and the probability and improbability of what they say should not be regarded as separate inquiries to be considered piecemeal.”

In Stellenbosch Farmer’s Winery Group Ltd v Martell et Cie and others 2003 (1) SA 11 (SCA) [also reported at [2002] JOL 10175 (SCA) – Ed] (handed down on 6 September 2002), the Court held that where a Commissioner is faced with two conflicting versions before him the probabilities of the two versions, to determine where the truth lies. The question that should be answered is whether the probabilities favour the party that bears the onus of proof. The Court further held that the credibility of a witness is in an extricable manner bound to the consideration where the probabilities fail to point to which version embraces the truth. The Supreme Court of Appeal 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1333

  supra, explained the technique generally used by the Courts in resolving factual disputes as one involving the making of findings on:

The credibility of the various factual witnesses .This will depend on the Court’s impression about the veracity of the witness, which in turn will depend on a variety of subsidiary factors, such as, 
The witness candour and demeanour in the witness box.
His bias, latent and blatant.
Internal and external contradiction of the evidence, with what was pleaded and put on his behalf.
The probability and improbability of particular aspects of his version.
The calibre and cogency of his performance compared to that of other witnesses testifying about the same incident or event.
The reliability of the witness, which turns on the factors listed in (a), (ii) (iv) and (v) above, as well as the following:
The opportunity he had to experience or observe the event in question.
The quality, integrity and independence of his recollection of the event in question.
The probabilities of each conflicting version. This requires an analysis and evaluation of the probability or improbability of each party’s version on each of the disputed issues. 
On the evidence before me, it is common cause that the University’s Assessment Policy provides for the process of verification of marks by the Assessor. The policy was not placed in dispute and the witnesses from both sides actively engaged throughout the proceedings on the content thereof. I am satisfied that the policies are valid and reasonable and that they were known to the applicant. In terms of the policy the lecturer is the Assessor as defined by the policy, which is Dr E Niyitunga, the applicant. The evidence that was led for the purpose of verification is to check the accuracy and correctness of the information that one is verifying. This was conceded by the applicant, Carmen Joel, and Prof Domonique and is therefore undisputed. 
The applicant also conceded that when a lecturer appends his signature to a mark sheet, it signifies that he is satisfied that the contents are accurate and correct. This forms part of the verification process. The applicant by appending his signature to the final mark sheet that was sent to him by Mr Reckson Maluleka, the administrator, on 9 November 2023, confirmed that the contents were correct and accurate. In doing so, he created the impression that he would have checked/verified the contents before he signed. It is common cause that/the mark sheet reflected a mark of 74% as the examination mark for the student Lechesa. On the applicant’s own version, which was corroborated by the respondent’s witnesses, Ms Lechesa (“student”) did not write the examination, which took place on 30 October 2023. This has been confirmed by the applicant himself and on his own version 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1334

  when he contacted the student in question. The applicant conceded that he knew this as he called Ms Lechesa to find out why she did not write the examination after having noticed that she was not present at the examination venue.

I find it highly improbable that when he collected all the exam scripts on the day of the examination and reconciled it, with the attendance registers this would also not have been apparent to him. The applicant confirmed that he performed this part of the verification process. He led evidence that Ms Lechesa (“student”) explained that she could not write as she had injured her hand having been assaulted by her boyfriend and he advised her to seek medical attention, obtain a medical note and depose to an affidavit of the incident at the police station. 
In my view this explanation and guidance given to the student by the applicant cannot be causally ignored or forgotten, because it was within the time frame of him verifying and signing off the final mark sheet. The applicant emphasised the point of what he characterised as a practice that he found in the department in respect of the assessment process and maintained that this was what he had always followed. In my observation and on a closer examination of the University assessment policy and the practice spoken of, it was evident to me that the only difference was that in terms of the practice the marks are captured by the administrator and not the lecturer. In this regard the respondent’s witness, Professor Thea Tselepis, led credible evidence for this deviation and the respondent took no issue with this. Having said that does not imply that the applicant had a justifiable reason for not verifying the contents of the final mark sheet before signing it.
Furthermore, the applicant testified as a critical part of his defence that the practice only required that he would have to check the border line marks and not all marks. Evidence was led by both witnesses that border-line marks are marks of 38, 39 and 73, 74 percent for the final mark. His version was that this was to be checked by him as he had the discretion to either increase or decrease this mark. Regrettably, the applicant’s own witness, Dr. Carmen Joel, emphatically stated, during cross-examination, contrary to his version, that lecturers were required to go through all final marks and not just the border-line cases. 
She explained that this is so as not all mark sheets will have border-line cases, but all mark sheets must be verified. Despite, the fact that Prof Dominique supported the applicant’s version in this regard, I must conclude that it was not plausible. My only conclusion is that the applicant through his conduct was grossly negligent because he did not check the contents of the mark sheet when he signed it off on 9 November 2023 or signed it knowing that the mark awarded to Lechesa ought not to have been there. 
I find that the evidence by the respondent’s witness, Prof Thea Tselepis, on the process and the practice was clear, consistent, credible and sustained. Her evidence demonstrated that the applicant failed to carry out his responsibility as the lecturer to ensure the accuracy and correctness of the marks prevailed, in particular in light of him having appended his signature to the document.



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1335
I further find that his testimony that the marks sheet is editable and therefore the mark could have been inserted after he affixed his signature to the document is not plausible. This, in my view, is simply an afterthought. I say this on the basis that the mark sheet submitted was a system generated document, had a date and it was time stamped and if it was probable that the document was changed after it was signed by the applicant it would had a different date and time. I find him guilty as charged on charge 1. 
Turning to 1.2, I find that as a direct consequence of the applicant signing off the final mark sheet that reflected 74% for the examination for Lechesa, (“student”) thus giving her 75% as the overall mark, allowed her to be accepted into the Master’s programme. I am not convinced by his assertion that acceptance into a Master’s programme has specific requirements and that it does not simply depend on a mark received in one module. In my objective view on the evidence tendered that the student’s mark for the examination should have been zero. In the circumstances, she would have failed the module and would not obtained her Honours qualification, let alone be admitted into a Master’s Programme. 
This was conceded by the applicant himself and two of his witnesses. Even his ardent supporter at the arbitration, Prof Dominique conceded that once the lecturer and moderator signs off on the mark sheet it makes its way to him. He went further and stated that he did not and was not expected to verify the correctness of the marks, which made his role irrelevant. This confirmed the proposition that the final check ends with the lecturer before signing off. As a consequence, the student (Lechesa’s) marks were released to her and were relied on when she was accepted into the Master’s programme. I cannot ignore that she was accepted into the MA programme based on having obtained a 75% overall mark in a module that she failed. 
Lastly, regarding the applicant’s defence that he was a whistleblower who brought to the attention of the employer that Lechesa (“student”) had gained entry into a Master’s programme under circumstances where she ought not to and that this led to the University uncovering possible fraud on the part of the administrator (Reckson Maluleka) and students is mindboggling. The primary responsibility remained with the applicant to verify all marks on a final mark sheet before signing off and further processing. 
Objectively speaking in my view this version was well orchestrated, I say this on the basis that he created his own audience when he raised this as suspicious to Dr Majam on Monday, 5 February 2024. In doing so, he canvassed his witnesses in support of his case, however, the difficulty for him was that the witnesses were unaware of his relationship with the student and the WhatsApp communications. I observed during the testimony that they were shocked by that revelation. This narrative must be rejected as not plausible or credible. 
In my view, based on the evidence presented, he knew by 17 January 2024 that Lechesa could not have passed one of her exit modules, as she had not written the main examination, supplementary or special exam and therefore would not have completed her current qualification, let alone be accepted into a Master’s programme. The fact that he congratulated her on 1 February 2024 is a clear demonstration of manipulation on his part. 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1336
Furthermore, I was taken aback by the applicant’s testimony by implicating RM as the real culprit in the whole episode. Quite frankly, I was not persuaded by this dramatic testimony. In my opinion this was an afterthought in defence of his case. Strangely, most of this new evidence was not tendered at the disciplinary hearing. I, therefore, find the respondent’s case to be more probable and reliable than that of the applicant on a balance of probabilities. I find him guilty as per the charge sheet levelled against him.
The last issue to determine is whether the dismissal sanction was an appropriate remedy. In keeping with the matter of Sidumo and another v Platinum (Pty) Ltd and others [2007] 28 ILJ 2405 (CC), [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC), I am required to consider the following factors which is not an exhaustive list namely:
take into account the totality of circumstances;
consider the importance of the rule that was broken and the impact of the trust relationship;
consider the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal and the employee’s challenge to the dismissal;
the harm caused by the employee’s conduct;
the impact that it had on the trust relationship;
whether training and instruction may result in the employee not repeating the misconduct,
the effect of the dismissal on the employee and his or her long service record. 
In terms of the Sidumo judgment supra as per Navsa at paragraph 79 and in accordance with the provisions of the LRA, a commissioner has to determine whether a dismissal is fair or not. A commissioner is not given the power to consider afresh what he or she would have done, but simply to decide whether what the employer did was fair. In arriving at a decision, the Commissioner is not required to defer to the decision of the employer. What is required is that he/she must consider all relevant circumstances. 
Despite the guidelines provided by the Constitutional Court judgment supra, I have also taken into account section 138(6) of the LRA and the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal (“Code”) issued by NEDLAC and Guidelines published by the CCMA such as Guidelines – Misconduct Arbitrations. .
In considering the factors above, firstly the respondent’s Disciplinary Policy and Procedure provides that a dismissal will be imposed if the misconduct is of such gravity that it makes the continued employment relationship intolerable and/or where progressive discipline, if applicable, has failed to correct the employee’s conduct.” 
The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, (“Code”) in item 3(5) provides, when deciding whether or not to impose the penalty of dismissal, the employer should in addition to the gravity of the misconduct consider factors such as the employee’s circumstances (including length of service, previous disciplinary record and personal circumstances) the nature of the job and the circumstances of the infringement itself. It is trite that our Courts have endorsed the concept of corrective or progressive discipline. This 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1337

  approach regards the purpose of discipline as a means for employees to know and understand what standards are required of them. Efforts should be made to correct employees’ behaviour through a system of graduated disciplinary measures such as counselling and warnings. However, I take cognisance that the Code of Good Practice defines what are minor and serious offences. In my view the allegations against the applicant fall within the ambit of serious misconduct. It could have catastrophic consequences for the respondent.

I accept the respondent’s submission that the conduct could compromise the Universities image and cause reputational damage, in particular in relation to the credibility of the institution. The respondent argued that the applicant’s conduct has broken the trust relationship between him and the employer through his conduct. I accept that the misconduct committed by the applicant falls within the ambit of a serious offense and the trust relationship was in danger and unlikely to be restored. 
In Council for Scientific and Industrial Research v Fijen (1996) 17 ILJ 18 (AD) at paragraph 26, [1996] 6 BLLR 685 (A) it was held and it is well established that any relationship between the employee and his employer is one of trust and confidence. In the LAC judgment in De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd v CCMA and others (2000) 21 ILJ 1051 (LAC) at paragraph 25 [also reported at [2000] 9 BLLR 995 (LAC) – Ed], the Court held that it would be difficult for an employer to re-employ an employee who has shown no remorse. It emphasised that acknowledgement of wrongdoing is the first step towards rehabilitation. It held that in the absence of a re- commitment to the employers’ workplace values, an employee cannot hope to re-establish the trust that she/he had broken.
This is very relevant in the case whereby the applicant held a senior position in the University. This kind of conduct cannot be easily condoned. He had shown no remorse for his action, notwithstanding that remorse is the first step towards rehabilitation. He held the view that he was not guilty but was a victim of circumstances. I am not persuaded that additional training and counselling would serve any purpose. I am therefore of the view that the trust that was destroyed between him and the respondent cannot be restored. 
In Hulett Aluminium (Pty) Ltd v Bargaining Council for the Metal Industry and others [2008] 3 BLLR 241 (LC), the Labour Court held at para 42:

“the presence of dishonesty tilts the scales to an extent that even the strongest mitigating factors, like long service and a clean record of discipline are likely to have minimal impact on the sanction to be imposed. In other words whatever the amount of mitigation, the relationship is unlikely to be restored once dishonesty has been established in particular in a case where the employee shows no remorse. The reason for this is that there is a high premium placed on the employees that damages the trust relationship which underpins the essence of the employment relationship.”

I accept that the case supra deals with dishonesty which the applicant was not charged for, however, the principle of remorse is relevant. The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, in item 3(3) therefore recognises that the sanction of dismissal is fair and appropriate in such circumstances as in the 



 
[2025] 12 BALR 1322 (CCMA) at 1338

  present case. I find that it was not unfair for the respondent to have dismissed the applicant. The respondent, accordingly proved, on a balance of probabilities, that it had a fair reason for dismissing the applicant. 

Lastly, I accept that any termination of a contract of employment could have far reaching consequences to employees, especially in the current economic climate. In this regard the LAC observed in De Beers Consolidated Mines Limited supra, that a dismissal is a not an expression of moral outrage, much is it an act of vengeance, it is, or should be a sensible operational response to risk management in a particular enterprise. It has everything to do with the employer’s operational requirements. 
Lastly, even though the applicant raised the procedural issue, it was mainly in respect of the internal procedures and practices and was not directly related to the Disciplinary Enquiry itself. It appears that the issue was not pursued during the arbitration proceedings and the applicant’s emphasis was mainly on the substantive fairness of his dismissal. I noticed that even the parties did not address it in their respective closing arguments. I therefore did not make a finding in respect of the procedural fairness as the principal focus was on the substantive fairness. 
On the totality of the circumstances, I find that the respondent has proved, on a balance of probabilities, that it had a fair reason in dismissing the applicant. I am therefore of the view that any lesser sanction would not serve a purpose and must be ruled out. I accordingly make the following finding in my award. 

Award

I find that:

The applicant’s dismissal was substantively fair.
The application is dismissed.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document