



Gounden / SAPS & others [2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban 
Case No: PSSS 73 / 06 / 07 
Hearing Date(s): 09 / 02 / 2007, 02 / 05 / 2007 
 Award Date(s): 09 / 05 / 2007 
Bench: L Williams 


Keywords


Labour law — Unfair labour practice — Incentive bonus — Failure to pay

Mini Summary


The applicant had applied for an incentive bonus. In terms of the respondent's policy, only 30% of the members at each salary level would receive the bonus. Although the applicant had been recommended by his station but the area evaluation panel removed his name from the list and replaced him with other members who had not been recommended by the station. Contending that the panel made an unfair decision and failed to comply with the national instruction in this regard, the applicant sought payment of the incentive bonus he believed he should have received.

Held that the dispute concerned the existence of an unfair labour practice. The particular form of the alleged unfair labour practice related to the provision of a benefit.

The arbitrator examined the facts, and found that the respondent's decision was defensible. The application was accordingly dismissed.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 1




Details of hearing and representation

The con-arb took place at the SAPS offices at Servamus Building in Durban on 9 February 2007. The applicant was represented by Mr Mulder from POPCRU and the respondent was represented by Captain Latiff. At the second hearing on 2 May 2007, the parties were again represented by the same representatives but one of the joinder parties, CJ van Wyk, was also present. None of the other joinder parties appeared but all had been served with the notice of set down. The matter continued in their absence.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 2

Issues to be decided

The applicant claimed that the respondent acted unfairly in that it failed to pay him his incentive bonus for 2004/2005.

The issue to be decided was thus whether the respondent's conduct in failing to award the applicant this benefit was unfair and constituted an unfair labour practice.

Preliminary issues

The matter was postponed on 9 February 2007 because the joinder parties had not been served with the notice of set down, despite the fact that a ruling on joinder had been issued in December 2006. A pre-arbitration meeting was held and the parties agreed to a common bundle.

On 2 May 2007, Captain Latiff noted that joinder party Nalathoren had not consented to the disclosure of his application documents and thus that they had not been added to the bundle. He believed they were relevant and would support the respondent's case and I accordingly ruled that the documents ought to be disclosed. Copies were duly handed up and added to the bundle.

Background to the dispute

The applicant applied for an incentive/reward system in the 2004/2005 year. In terms of the policy, only 30% of the members at each salary level would receive the bonus. The applicant was recommended by his station but the area evaluation panel removed his name from the list and replaced him with other members who had not been recommended by the station. The applicant felt that the panel made an unfair decision and failed to comply with the national instruction in this regard. He sought payment of the incentive bonus he believed he should have received.

The respondent pointed out that participation in the scheme was voluntary and that the decision of the evaluation committee was final. The evaluation committee were the only ones authorised to make the decision as to who received the bonus and the applicant simply did not fall into the top 30% of his salary level.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 3

Survey of the evidence

Applicant

Parmamathan Gounden had 23 years service and was currently in the uniformed component at Plessislaer. He confirmed that he applied for an incentive in the financial year 2004/2005. He filled in the prescribed application and it appeared at 96–119 of the bundle. His station reviewed his application and recommended him for the incentive before sending the documents to area HR. The applicant himself sat on the recommendation panel at his station for members of ranks lower than himself. When doing the reviews, he had reference to the guideline given to them by management services. In terms thereof, he was told that it had been resolved at the area commissioner's conference that the station would give recommendations to the area. The station panels were told to recommend 30% of candidates from each salary level who they felt deserved the incentive. Those recommendations were then forwarded to the area commissioner's office.

The applicant was surprised to discover that although he had been recommended by his station, he had not been awarded the incentive. His name had been removed from the list and five others had been added. The addition of those persons meant they exceeded the 30% threshold. This was a contravention of the policy. It was also required (at 252) that one member of the evaluation committee had relevant competence regarding the job requirements and that the station commissioner or one of the heads of components should be involved. That did not occur in his case and the panel consisted of persons in the detective services. It was chaired by Griesel who was detective head in the area and the other panelists, Laalmohan and Mbela, were from the detective component. The applicant was in the CSC. He also noted that his station commissioner's name did not appear on the area panel as per the policy.

The applicant understood that the station commissioner's decision would not be interfered with and that the area committee might simply add names to the list but not remove anyone. At 68 was a list of five members from the station. His name appeared on that list, along with Zondi, Thaver, Pillay and Holby. At 119 was the area panel's assessment of him in terms of which they found that he was not eligible for the incentive because of the "30% allocation". The applicant didn't believe that was fair and felt that the area panel should have followed the recommendations of the station commissioner as he knew his members best. He, Pillay and Holby were replaced with PT Khumalo, R Nalathoren, E Mkhize, A Ndlovu and C van Wyk. Thaver and Zondi remained. That meant seven people got the incentive instead of five and, given that 13 applied, it exceeded the 30% allowance per station. The applicant did not dispute whether or not those members deserved the incentive but submitted that he was unhappy that his employer didn't follow its own procedures.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 4

On cross-examination the applicant agreed that only 30% of candidates could receive the incentive but denied it was difficult to make that decision. In the minute from the area office (at 37) panels were told to be objective and meet the required standard of 30% and that was not done in this instance. Station commissioners were instructed to sit with their members to "discuss it" at station level and yet the recommendations from the stations were ignored.

The applicant confirmed that the official 12/1/1 documentation on the "implementation of the incentive and reward scheme for the SAPS 2004–5" recorded in clause 4.1 that the process was voluntary and the awarding of incentive was at the discretion of the provincial commissioner based on recommendations by the panel. The decision was to be regarded as final. He insisted that the area commissioner had delegated his duty to the station commissioner as a result of the comments that were made at the conference. He conceded that was not reflected in the minute of the conference (at 37) but submitted that it was recorded in Usher's notes from the conference at 32. When directed to the document, he suggested that her note "management decision – set up a board" meant the area commissioner wanted boards set up at the station. He agreed that the station commissioners had input into the process and made recommendations of their own but denied that the panel was not obliged to rely on their list. The applicant insisted that the station knew its members the best and that their view ought to be relied on. He conceded that the evaluation panel looked at applications for the whole area and not just his station.

The incentive was for "outstanding annual performance of 30% employees per salary level" (at 16). Captain Latiff put to him that it was not 30% per station but 30% per salary level and thus that it was quite possible there would be more members from one station than another would. The applicant denied that and insisted that it was per station. He conceded that 13 applied for the incentive at his station and salary level (at 68) and admitted that 30% of 13 would not be five. He denied, however, that the station was obliged to recommend the candidates on the number that applied and said they worked out the threshold on the total number of members at level eight at their station (ie 18).

It was true that the evaluation committee had the discretion to award the incentive (at 20) and the policy did record the fact that a recommendation by one's supervisor did not automatically entitle one to the incentive. The evaluation committee had, however, he submitted, delegated their duties to the station. The applicant was referred to paragraphs [4.4]–[4.7] of the policy and Captain Latiff put to him that it was clear that only three committees were recognised – the area, province and division. He further put to him that the only reason the stations were involved was because of complaints that the area commissioner favoured some members over others when awarding incentives and that it was just a request for their input and not a delegation of power. The applicant conceded the area panel was the recognised panel and that the area commissioner asked for recommendations from the station.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 5

The applicant was referred to the policy at 253 in terms of which the respondent was allowed to cluster employees if there are too few to allow an incentive to be awarded at certain salary level. He confirmed that was permitted but insisted it was wrong that his name was removed from the list. Captain Latiff put to him that the panel looked at the entire salary level eight and when they did that, they had to choose who fell into the top 30%. They chose the very best and unfortunately he didn't fall into that group. The applicant disagreed and said their comment wasn't that he was the best but that he wasn't within the 30%. He noted that 64 captains got the incentive which was more than 30% of those who applied and that it was thus a breach of the policy and procedure. Captain Latiff conceded that might well be true but put to him that the respondent had clustered salary level seven and eight together and hence there might be more members at one level than another. The applicant insisted that it was only allowed to be 30% per salary level and further denied that there was any need to cluster the level eight members.

On re-examination the applicant reiterated that the message he received from the conference was that a committee should sit at the station and recommend 30% of the members per salary level for the incentive. 18 people at Plessislaer were at salary level eight and the panel thus awarded the incentive to 30% of that number, regardless of the number that applied. It made no sense for the evaluation committee to interfere with that recommendation, as the station knew its members best. It was also wrong for them to add to the list and thereby exceed the 30% threshold for his station.

Respondent

Christiaan Frederik Griesel was appointed to chair the evaluation committee for salary levels seven and eight. There was another panel for those same salary levels and it was chaired by Hlongwane. The national policy allowed for the incentive to be awarded to 30% of the employees on each salary level. An applicant for incentive had to submit a performance output summary to his/her supervisor in order to qualify. The applicant gave documents to his station, which in turn submitted it to the area office where the evaluation committee looked at it and gave a recommendation to the area commissioner. The evaluation committee was entitled (at 24) to categorise and assess positions per salary level in a way that would "contribute to fair and consistent evaluation" of the employees.

Griesl attended the area commissioner's conference and it was true that Commissioner Davis mentioned the fact that stations was complaining that they were not part of the incentive process. Arising from that he told them to recommend 30% of the people at their own station to the area and the evaluation panel would then take that into account. It was, however, just a recommendation and didn't mean he delegated his authority to the stations nor did it mean the stations were making the decision. The policy only  
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 6
prescribed duties for the evaluation committee and not for the station (paragraph [3]) and there were only three recognised committees. The station was not one of them.

The station commissioner's recommendation for Plessislaer at level eight appeared at page 68. The panel did take it into consideration, however, their role was not to look at the stations in isolation but at salary level eight for the entire area. In some cases the station commissioners were captains themselves and, as they couldn't recommend themselves, they were excluded from the station lists. That was unfair and so the evaluation committee considered them as well. That was entirely within the parameters of the policy, which required them to look at all the salary level eight's (at 47). The letter attached to the list of members at level eight stated that the requirement was 30% per salary level (at 48) and not per station. There were 18 persons at level eight at Plessislaer. Out of those 18, 13 applied for the incentive and the station recommended five people.

68 people at level eight received incentives in the area. Griesel conceded that was more than 30% but explained that his committee was told they were allowed more people on level eight because there were less applicants on the other salary levels and they were thus allowed to "use that shortfall". In fact they clustered together the level seven and eight applicants and that was how they were able to give more level eight's the incentive. That was permitted in terms of the policy and they were told it allowed them to streamline the process. The area commissioner did the clustering and appointed Griesel to chair salary levels seven and eight.

It was true that the applicant was recommended by the station but he didn't get an incentive. He was evaluated along with everyone else and unfortunately he didn't meet the cut off of 30%. The committee looked at and discussed every application and they also took into account what was said by the station commissioner. The criteria they applied were set out in step seven of the policy at 254. They had to look at the overall level of performance and sort the applications into those who were outstanding, good, satisfactory and not satisfactory. That was done bearing in mind the fact that they could only give 30% of the people an incentive. The panel did comply with those steps and did make comments on the applicant's application form. He was only ranked "satisfactory" and the others who were awarded the incentive had a higher ranking than him.

On cross-examination, Griesel confirmed that two committees were appointed to decide levels seven and eight. He wasn't sure of the reason but assumed it was because of the volume. He and Hlongwane didn't meet and each panel did their own appointments. The process took about four days. The PEP document accompanied the application and it was given to them with the application form and the station's recommendations. He got all the applications for Plessislaer together and had the station's recommendation with him at the time. 

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 7

The panel went through each and every application and discussed it before making their recommendation.

Mr Mulder referred him at 44 and 37, being the minutes of the area commissioner's conference. Griesel agreed that they discussed incentives and that the station commissioners wanted input into the process. It was based on a perception that some deserving candidates didn't get the incentive. The area commissioner allowed it but it was an "added" phase and just a way to involve them in the process. The panel did look at their recommendations but they made their decisions after looking at all the level eight is for the whole area and not on a station-by-station basis. Station commissioners weren't on the panel but did give their recommendation.

It was true that the panel should be comprised of people who were competent to assess the position. Griesel had both CSC and detective experience and Laalmohan also had CSC experience. Mbhele had been a station commissioner for five years and knew a bit about logistics. If one accumulated their experience they had a fair knowledge of general policing and were competent to do the evaluation.

Once they had finished the process of looking at level seven and level eight, they were told that if they used less than 30% at level seven, they could allocate the balance to the level eight's. On receipt of that information the panel re-evaluated all of those who had not yet been given the incentive. That was not unfair. No persons who got "not satisfactory" were considered and they only looked at those who were "satisfactory" and above. There were percentages within the range of "satisfactory" and so it might be that one would get it and another wouldn't. 60–75% would be classed "satisfactory" and the candidate would be marked a three. The applicant was a three but he was on the low side of the 60–75% range, which was why other "satisfactory" candidates who scored a higher percentage received the incentive ahead of him. There was no list in the bundle showing who was added and Griesel didn't remember their names. He was also unsure by what percentage they exceeded the 30%. The instruction was given to them by Director Badul verbally.

Griesel was directed to some of the application documents which had handwritten notations on them. He agreed it was his writing but pointed out that it was his personal note and not a reflection of the panel decision. There was no handwritten notation on the applicant's document at 96 but he did still look at it. Griesel was sure he looked at each and every document.

It was true that the station recommended the applicant but they were not bound by that. The panel made their own recommendations and viewed others as better performers. It was not true that Director Badul told him to put people on the list and they were not led by anyone outside the committee.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 8

On re-examination, Griesel disagreed that they were not permitted to cluster levels seven and eight although those were not expressly referred to in the policy. The policy did not prohibit them from clustering levels other than 9–12. Everyone was evaluated and had a fair chance to be considered for the incentive.

Summary of the argument

Mr Mulder for the applicant argued that the respondent had been unfair in that it ignored the station's recommendation of the most suitable candidates, despite the fact that their input had been specifically requested. In all other levels, the persons recommended by the station received the incentive but not at level eight. Griesel claimed he remembered the applicant's application but it strange that he was unable to explain the absence of markings on his documents. The logical inference is that the document was never before the panel. Griesel claimed the panel clustered level seven and eight but his evidence in that regard was unclear. In any event, the policy only permitted levels nine and ten and 11 and 12 to be clustered because they were the same rank. The panel acted contrary to the instruction by clustering levels seven and eight and had no authority to do that. They also erred in awarding more than 30% of the employees at each level the incentive because that, too, was not provided for in the policy. The panel's reasons for removing the applicant were highly subjective and could not be properly justified. On that basis Mr Mulder sought that I find in favour of the applicant and award him the incentive for that year ie R6 000.

Captain Latiff for the respondent agreed that the applicant was recommended by the acting station commissioner but noted that it was not their decision to make. The Collins English Dictionary defined recommendation as to "advise and praise" and advising was all that was required of the station. One could not read into or rely on their recommendation.

The area evaluation committee was required to look at the entire area on that salary level and award the incentive to the top 30%. The applicant was well aware it was a discretionary process and the panel had fairly exercised that discretion. The only complaint was to the procedure followed but that was without substance in that the committee complied with the policy and followed the procedure in scrutinising all the applicants. They looked at each application and the recommendations but, when viewing the applicant alongside all the other level eights in that area, he was not in the top 30%. He was a low three and the panel's decision was thus just. The clustering was permitted and the wording of the policy was clearly discretionary. It was not limited to level nine–12. There was likewise no restriction in the policy to the 30% threshold and there was no evidence to refute the respondent's version that they clustered the two salary levels together and were thus permitted to allocate the "deficit" at level seven to level eight.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 9

Captain Latiff asked that I dismiss the application on the basis that the applicant had failed to prove the panel was procedurally unfair. He further sought costs in favour of the respondent on basis that the matter was frivolously brought to SSSBC.

Analysis of evidence and argument

In terms of section 186(2) "unfair labour practice" means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving:

Unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee.
The unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee.
The failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of  2000 on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."

The applicant's claim fell under subsection (a) being allegedly unfair conduct in relation to the provision of a benefit. It was common cause that the benefit in question was the incentive bonus for the financial year 2004/5. The applicant did not challenge the merits of the awarding of the bonus but did aver that the panel acted in a manner that was so grossly unprocedural that he ought to be awarded the bonus.

It was common cause that the procedure binding the panel in its conduct was National Instruction 12/1/1 entitled "implementation of the incentive and reward scheme for the South African police service: 2004–2005 evaluation period".

The clauses referred to by the parties were:

The incentive and reward scheme will recognise outstanding annual performance of 30% employees per salary level for the 2004–2005 evaluation period.
Participation by employees in this process is voluntary and the awarding of an incentive and reward is in the discretion of the relevant provincial commissioner, divisional commissioner, deputy national commissioner or national commissioner based on the recommendation of the evaluations committee. Their decision is final.
The assigned station/section/unit representative must record the applications on the control list and submit the applications to the assigned area/provincial/divisional HRM representative by 15 August 2005. 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 10
The assigned area/provincial/divisional HRM representative must submit the applications to the evaluation committee by 22 August 2005.
The evaluation committee must consider all the submissions received, identify qualifying employees and submit the namelist of qualifying employees per salary level to the assigned area/provincial/divisional HRM representative by 3 October 2005.

A further document relied on and referred to is title "procedure for application and administration of the incentive reward scheme for the SAPS: 2004–2005 evaluation period" and the relevant portion is as follows:

Employees must take note that participation in this process is voluntary and awarding of an incentive and reward in accordance with this implementation procedure is at the discretion of the relevant evaluation committee and the decision taken is final. The fact that an employee, on average, obtained the highest rating in the assessment or the highest marks or percentages during their PEP/SMS evaluation or was recommended by his or her supervisor for an incentive and reward, does not establish any right or legitimate expectation on the part of the employee to be awarded an incentive and reward.
Provinces and divisions have the discretion to categorise and assess positions per salary level in service delivery and supervisory categories that will contribute to fair and consistent evaluation of employees.

To ease the evaluation process, employees on salary levels nine and ten may be clustered together and employees on 11 and 12 may be clustered together.

The third procedure document submitted and relied on by the parties was entitled "procedure for the evaluation and identification of qualifying employees: incentive and reward scheme: SAPS: 2004–2005 evaluation period". That document requires that at least one member of the evaluation committee has relevant competence regarding the job requirements of the category being evaluated and requires that "as far as possible" the station commissioner for the station environment or unit head be included on the panel. The document goes onto to set out the duties of the evaluation committee in 15 steps. Step five states:

"Identify the groups per salary level where the number of employees are too few to allow for an incentive and reward to be awarded and decide on the possible clustering of applications per salary level to ensure the awarding of an incentive/reward. To ease the evaluation process, employees on salary levels 9 and 10 may be clustered together and employees on 11 and 12 may be clustered together."

The following facts were either common cause or not disputed: 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 11
• The applicant applied for the 2004/5 incentive and his application was received.

He scored a low three on this performance rating and was deemed "satisfactory".
Only 30% of employees at each salary level would be given the incentive.
Previously the station commissioners were not involved in the process at all and decisions were made solely at the area.
Following on a conference, the area commissioner authorised the stations to submit a list of recommendations to the evaluation committee.
The applicant sat on such a panel at his own station for persons of rank lower than himself and most of those recommendations were followed by the area.
He was endorsed for the incentive by the station level committee.
The area evaluation committee considered that recommendation but declined to award the applicant the incentive.
Their reason for so doing was that he did not fall within the 30% threshold.
Other members at his station who had not been recommended by the station panel were awarded the incentive.
The panel did not consider the applications on a station-by-station basis but looked at all the level eight applicants in the area together.
They clustered level seven and eight together and, as there were less level seven candidates, they awarded the "excess" incentives to the level eight applicants. This meant that more than 30% of the level eight applicants received the incentive.
The policy stated that the panel had discretion to make the decision and that their decision was final.

The applicant made it clear at the outset that he did not challenge the merits of the matter and would not dispute that the candidates given the incentive were entitled to it. He did, however, aver that the panel failed to follow the procedure. The following specific challenges were made to the process:

The panel ignored the station commissioner's recommendations in circumstances where they ought to have relied on them (ie the power had been delegated to the station).
The panel gave more than 30% of the candidates at level eight the incentive, which was contrary to the policy
The panel breached policy by clustering level seven and eight together when that is not permitted.
They had no valid reason to remove the applicant from the list.
The fact that his document had no markings on it suggested it was never considered.
The panel was not competent to assess the category of employees and the station commissioner was not included on the panel. 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 12

I shall consider each argument in turn.

The applicant's primary complaint was that the evaluation committee did not follow the station recommendation. He gave evidence that the decision taken at the conference (to request input from the stations) meant that the area had delegated its powers to the station and that they were obligated to follow their recommendations. There was, however, quite simply no evidence to support this. The minute of the conference makes no reference to any delegation of powers and, as Captain Latiff pointed out, it is furthermore not provided for in the policy. The applicant sought to rely on his interpretation of a rather cryptic remark in Usher's notes to support his argument but, in the absence of evidence from the author of the document that his interpretation is correct, I cannot place reliance thereon. Indeed, the documents clearly state that the station would give a "recommendation" to the area. A "recommendation" cannot be considered binding and it is simply a suggestion or, as Captain Latiff defined it, "advice". The applicant also made much of the fact that the area did abide the view of the station in relation to the other salary levels but not his own, however, there was no evidence before me to suggest any sinister motive in this regard. In the premises I cannot uphold the applicant's arguments in this regard.

The second complaint was the fact that the panel awarded the incentive to more than 30% of the candidates. This fact was common cause but the respondent's witness denied that it was a breach of the policy because they had clustered two salary levels together and were thus able to award the 30% across the board of both, without it being necessarily equal between level seven and level eight. The applicant was not able to refute this and in the premises I must accept that indeed took place. The question is whether or not it was procedurally fair.

Linked with that enquiry is the third complaint, namely that the panel was not permitted to cluster at level seven and eight, for certainly if that is not permissible, they have erred in awarding incentives to more than 30% of the level eight applicants. The procedure document states that "provinces and divisions have the discretion to categorise and assess positions per salary level in service delivery and supervisory categories that will contribute to fair and consistent evaluation of employees". It goes on to say that in order to "ease the evaluation process, employees on salary levels nine and ten may be clustered together and employees on 11 and 12 may be clustered together. The third procedure document states that step five requires the evaluation committee to "identify the groups per salary level where the number of employees are too few to allow for an incentive and reward to be awarded and decide on the possible clustering of applications per salary level to ensure the awarding of an incentive/reward". It to adds the proviso that "to ease the evaluation process, employees on salary levels nine and ten may be clustered together and employees on 11 and 12 may be clustered together." 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 13
It is quite clear that clustering may occur at levels nine–12. The question is whether or not it can occur at levels other than those specifically mentioned in the procedure document. Mr Mulder argued that it could not but Captain Latiff submitted that the wording was not peremptory and gave the committee a discretion to cluster where there were too few employees to allow for an incentive to be awarded. I am inclined to agree with his interpretation, especially in view of the wording in the document at 253. The first sentence clearly suggests that the committee should look at joining together small groups so that incentives can be awarded. The fact that it ends there suggests that the committee is vested with a general discretion. The second sentence goes on to suggest joining nine and ten and 11 and 12 to ease the process. This is a separate suggestion/instruction and I am therefore satisfied that the policy does not preclude clustering at other levels, provided it is done in line with the procedure. There was no evidence before me at this hearing to refute Griesel's contention that there were too few salary level sevens hence the reason they combined them with the level eight's. I therefore have to accept his version in this regard and I accordingly find that the respondent was permitted to cluster the level seven and eight applicants together. They were then considered as a group and it is quite possible, and in fact likely, that more than 30% of the level eight employees would have received the incentive. That is not procedurally unfair in these circumstances.

Mr Mulder argued that the panel had no fair reason to remove the applicant from the list and that it was highly subjective. Griesel testified that the applicant was considered alongside all the other level eights and quite simply did not fall into the top 30%. He was a low three rating and others fared far better than he did. This was not disputed nor did the applicant give any evidence that he was unfairly rated or that others were wrongly considered. In addition, there was no suggestion of any sinister motive on the part of any of the panelists. It must be noted further that the applicant was not "removed" from a list as argued by him, because his application was considered with all the others on his salary level and not on a station-by-station basis. Regard was had to the station's list but the panel exercised their discretion to award the incentive to better performers. The applicant argued that it was unfair that more than 30% of the members at his station got the incentive, but the policy provides for the awarding of the incentive to 30% of the salary level (my emphasis) and it may well be that the top performers come from one station. This is not in any way a deviation from the policy.

The applicant challenged the fact that his document had no notations or markings on it whereas the others did. Griesel agreed that he had made the notes but submitted that they were just his personal comments and did not reflect the view of the panel. He conceded that there were no such markings on the applicant's document but denied that meant they didn't consider it. Griesel was adamant that the panel looked at each and every application. His evidence in this regard could not be refuted and, in the premises, I am unable to draw the inference which the applicant asks that I draw, namely that the application was never considered.

 
[2007] JOL 20108 (SSSBC) at 14

The final challenge was to the competence of the panel. The applicant denied they were competent and submitted that they were all from the detective section and not CSC. Griesel gave evidence that he had worked in the CSC and thus that he had adequate experience to consider the category. He also noted that Laalmohan had previously been at the CSC and that Mbhele used to be a station commissioner. His evidence was not challenged and it was not put to him that that experience was inadequate. Lastly, the applicant pointed out that his station commissioner was not on the evaluation committee, but the policy clearly does not make that mandatory. It states that it should be done "as far as reasonably possible" and there is thus no procedural error in this regard.

In toto I am satisfied with the procedure followed by the respondent and find that the applicant has failed to discharge the onus of proving that an unfair labour practice was committed.

Captain Latiff asked that I order the applicant to pay the respondent's costs on the basis that the referral was made frivolously.

In the case of African Farms and Townships Ltd v Cape Town Municipality 1963 (2) SA 555 (A) the court found that, in order for a matter to be classified as frivolous and vexatious, it had to be "obviously unsustainable", groundless and malicious. In addition, the party must have shown no serious intention of proceeding.

I do not believe that to be of application in casu and I do not believe the applicant's referral was malicious or groundless. Whilst lacking merit in my view, it cannot be said to be "obviously unsustainable" such that a costs order is warranted. I accordingly decline the request for costs.

Award

The application is dismissed with no order as to costs.

Appearance:
None Indicated


End of Document