



Dauth / Brown and Weir’s Cash and Carry [2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: CCMA, Durban
Case No:  23-01
Date: 22/05/2002
Before: R Lyster, Senior Commissioner (CCMA)
Keywords


Applications in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Racist remarks — Employee distributing e-mail containing anti-Semitic remarks and attack on management — Dismissal justified.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was dismissed for distributing an offensive e-mail to more than 100 people, including the respondent’s senior management. He admitted that he had done so, but claimed that dismissal was too harsh a sanction because he was acting under stress caused by his impending retrenchment and while under the influence of prescription drugs. The applicant also claimed that, as the respondent’s business had since been transferred to another company, a continued employment relationship between himself and his new employer was neither untenable nor intolerable.

The commissioner noted that the applicant had not called a medical expert to confirm his claim that he was influenced by drugs. The applicant had insisted that, apart from derogatory and racist remarks contained in the e-mail, the contents were true. Even though a colleague on whose computer the e-mail was written had been suspended, the applicant had not disclosed that he was author of the e-mail until he failed a voluntary polygraph test. The contents of the e-mail and the manner in which it had been distributed indicated that the applicant was fully in control of himself when he composed the message. 

As to the applicant’s attempt to downplay anti-Semitic remarks in the e-mail, the commissioner rejected the applicant’s claim that no weight could be given to these remarks unless the person about whom they were made testified. This approach, and the applicant’s plea for reinstatement, indicated that the applicant was either unaware of the shocking nature of the comments in the e-mail, or was totally without remorse. The applicant’s claim that he had in fact “blown the whistle” on the respondent’s conduct was absurd. That the respondent had since sold it business was irrelevant.

The applicant’s dismissal was upheld

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Issue and representation

The hearing took place at the Durban offices of the CCMA, on 15 May 2002. Applicant was represented by Adv Bezuidenhout of the Durban bar, and respondent by Mr I Chadwick of Shepstone and Wylie. 

Applicant was dismissed by respondent in July 2001, for sending an email which the respondent regarded as, inter alia, inflammatory, on the internal  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 838
company email service, to over 100 persons, including all levels of management, as well as to the upper directorial and management echelons of the company. Applicant conceded that he had sent the email, but said that he had done so in a state of heightened stress and personal emotion, brought on by his feelings of anxiety and insecurity about his possible pending retrenchment, as well as induced by marital conflict, and whilst under the negative influence of prescription drugs which he was taking for depression, insomnia and physical pain arising from a knee injury. He also contested that the sanction was appropriate, saying that the respondent had overreacted, and that a sanction short of dismissal would have been appropriate. Finally, he said that because the company by which he had been employed, had been sold, it could not be said that a continued relationship between himself and a new employer was untenable or intolerable. 

Evidence

Respondent called two witnesses – the operations manager of respondent’s Isipingo branch, Mr E de Beer, and Ashok Ramanoor, an employee of respondent. De Beer testified that he had worked closely with applicant for some 18 months, and had found him to be a normal and rational person. He said that for the past 2 years or so, there had been a degree of uncertainty as to the future of the respondent company. An offer to purchase the company had been made, but this had fallen through. Another company (Massmart) had indicated that it would purchase 22 of respondent’s stores, and the other 20 or so would be sold as going concerns to purchasers, or closed down. In this event, staff would be retrenched. Furthermore, the head office, where applicant worked as a marketing manager, would not be purchased or absorbed by the new company, although some staff members from head office would go into the new company. He said he was aware that staff were very concerned about their futures with the company. He said that on the morning of 18 June 2001, one of his managers had brought him a copy of an email which had been sent on the company’s internal email system, to a large number of employees, from middle managers up to the level of the CEO. For the sake of completeness, I set out hereunder the text of the email. 

“What everyone needs to know is the truth about this sell out to massmart you have been sacrificed to make some Jews, Farrel Cohen and the other major shareholders richer, these people earn enough money as it is but they want more, so they sold the company, only part of it, the remaining stores will be closed down, if not bought by someone as a going concern, so is the head office going to close down, they do not care or hey would of sold the whole company. Massmart have no responsibility to those that are left behind they only bought the 22 stores, they are not obliged to give anyone jobs These jews call them selves gods people, they are children of the devil, they have said that they got R490 million for the sale of 11 browns stores and 11 weirs stores and that they expect another R100 million from the stores and the head office they are closing, this means that over 800 people will lose their jobs and everyone knows how hard it is to get another job, but this does not concern farrel cohen he will get a bonus from the sale, for a job well done and become even more richer at the expense of 800 lives ,these are people with families, but he does not care! He will have more even food on the table and can upgrade his house, send his children overseas to study, and go on holiday overseas, whilst the 800 who do not have jobs, destroyed people will have maybe no food on the table, take their children out of school 

 
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 839

lose their homes, cars, furniture etc because of no income, no money no job, but the Jew who betrayed everyone lives a life of luxury after destroying lives and people for more money. Steve Liebenberg another Jew was quoted in the paper that this was an excellent deal they will net R440 million rand and on top of it the 3 years they used us they made another R300 million, so what these Jews did is use us for 3 years made a lot of money and now we get thrown to the dogs, that their share price is now a good buy. What we got to make sure of is that we demand a package of 6 weeks for every years service, 1 years notice pay for inconvienance (sic) and we need to sue for being prostituted, and abused, they screwed us now they must pay back, they have the money, plenty of it and in cash, these Jews must now pay back for their deeds.the disgusting thing is that the chairman has a photo in the newspaper smiling and bragging about how good the deal is and how much money they are going to make but there is no mention of the over 800 jobs lost etc the people who make the company, who are out on the streets. Is this right that the rich become richer at the expense of honest people trying to do a days job for simple wages to live above the breadline. May these people rot in hell. These Jews do not celebrate christmas so they do not care, the 800 people with no, jobs are going to have a terrible christmas, some may not have a christmas. May the blood of these 800 people and plus all the families and children that will suffer from now on then spill all over the rich greedy un-godly Jews forever and may they all rot in hell!!. We who work for a minimum wage on the floor and in the offices must stand up and fight these ungodly rich jews who will kill for money, from us the caddies, the tea girl and the diectors who have all been screwed”.


The email had been sent from the computer of Ashok Ramanoor. De Beer, with the assistance of technical staff, was able to establish that the message had been entered into Ramanoor’s computer on Monday 11 June 2001, at 16h53 pm, but that it had been programmed to be sent and received on Saturday 16 June. Ramanoor denied any knowledge of the message. After consultation with other senior staff members, De Beer suspended Ramanoor and continued to investigate the matter. He explained that the computerised access and egress system used by respondent’s employees was capable of monitoring the movement of company employees in an out of the building. He was therefore able to deduce that Ramanoor had left the building at 16h26 pm on 11 June, ie some time before the email had been entered into the computer. Persons who were in the building after the time that the message had been entered into the system therefore became potential suspects. It was decided that all those staff persons, including Ramanoor, should undergo a voluntary polygraph or lie detector test the following week, Monday 25 June. The cost to respondent was some R750,00 per person. De Beer said that applicant had been in the office during the week following 18 June, and that he and all other staff had been notified of the upcoming polygraph test. He said that applicant had asked him what the respondent’s policy was on polygraph testing, and that he told him that it was voluntary but that it was in applicant’s best interests to undergo the test. applicant agreed and underwent the test on 26 June. Everyone but applicant passed the test. De Beer said that he was telephoned in his office by the polygraph technician on 26 June, and that he had informed him that applicant had failed the test, and that applicant would be coming through to De Beer’s office to discuss the matter with him. applicant arrived and after some discussion, applicant conceded that he had indeed sent the email, saying that he had been under stress. De Beer asked him why he had not come forward during the week 18–25 June, knowing that Ramanoor was under suspension. 

 
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 840

He said that at no stage did applicant ever make any reference to his medication. He told applicant he would have to undergo a disciplinary enquiry, and applicant offered to resign. De Beer told him to think about it, and applicant returned a short while later with a letter of resignation, which De Beer accepted. The following day, applicant withdrew the letter of resignation, and said that he wanted to fight for his retrenchment package. He said he would deny everything he’d said to De Beer, and that he had lied “so much now” that he would continue to lie. At this point the human resources manager of respondent came into De Beer’s office, and applicant repeated what he had just said to De Beer. De Beer said that he believed that one of the aims of the email was to incite people against the respondent, over the retrenchment issue. He said that at this point, no-one other than himself (De Beer) and the financial director, had been positively identified for retrenchment. The purchasers of respondent (Massmart) had held a meeting with managers at the Blue Waters Hotel in Durban at the end of May, and explained some aspects of the deal between Massmart and Rebserve Holdings, the holding company of respondent. 

He said that applicant was subjected to a disciplinary enquiry on 6 July, was dismissed, and that the chairperson of the internal appeal had upheld the dismissal. 

In cross-examination he said that he did not know that applicant was on medication, and did not know that he had been experiencing marital problems, or that his wife had left him since his dismissal. He conceded that employees felt that they were being kept in the dark and treated poorly, but denied that he had ever discussed the CEOs of the company and the holding company with anyone, and denied emphatically that he, along with other employees had indulged in derogatory and racist references to the Jewish directors. It was put to him that the email appeared to have been written by an extremely emotional person, and replied that while it was emotional, it appeared to have been thought out very clearly, and that the method of delaying its sending also appeared to have been carefully planned. He repeated that no-one had been identified for retrenchment, and that the stores that were not going to be purchased by Massmart, were going to be sold as going concerns, and that Massmart were going to employ a significant number of head office staff, where applicant was employed. In the final analysis, 102 out of 140 head office staff were taken over by Massmart. 

He was questioned at some length about why it had taken him so long to uplift the suspension on Ramanoor, when it had taken very little time to ascertain that he was not a suspect, and it was put to him that applicant could not be held responsible for any negative consequences of the suspension suffered by Ramanoor. He denied this, and said that Ramanoor still had to be considered a suspect at that point because the email had emanated from his computer. It was put to him that applicant had never intended to get Ramanoor into trouble, as applicant knew that respondent would quickly ascertain that it could not have been Ramanoor who sent the email. 

It was also put to him that as neither Levenberg or Cohen had testified at the inquiry or at this forum, their response to the email was not known, and that in any event, the company had been sold, and that it could not be said that the relationship with the new owner of the business had been destroyed. It was put to him that the main issue was that of Ramanoor’s position, and not the  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 841
derogatory remarks. He said that the chair of the disciplinary enquiry had made it quite clear that he took both aspects of the charges seriously. 

It was put to him that applicant had felt remorseful and that he had apologised to Ramanoor and to Mr Farrell Cohen. He replied that applicant had only done this at his (De Beer’s) suggestion. He denied the submission put to him that the respondent had decided to dismiss him in order to save the amount of his retrenchment package. 

Ramanoor testified, saying that his suspension had been deeply traumatic for him, and that he and his family were still suffering as a result. He said that he felt relieved to some extent when applicant had apologised to him, but that he was aware that applicant only apologised when De Beer told him to. In cross examination it was put to him that applicant had given him R100,00 for petrol, as Ramanoor had to drive frequently to and from work during the investigation into the incident. Ramanoor denied any knowledge of such payment. 

applicant testified, saying he had worked for the holding group for 17 years, and held the position of marketing manager at the time of his dismissal, earning a package of R23 600,00 per month. He described the two years of uncertainty pending the sale of the business, and that the workforce had been told, after a sale to Metro Cash and Carry had fallen through, that the business was not going to be sold, only to be informed a short while later that it was to be sold, and that retrenchments might follow. He said that he lost confidence in the CEO, Farrell Cohen, and started to take Prozac for depression, and Tryptenol to enable him to sleep at night. He said that his marriage began to deteriorate because of the continuing uncertainty about his job, and that he was sure that he would not be placed in the new company, as he had had discussions with someone from their marketing team. He said on the morning of 11 June he had had a serious domestic argument with his wife and had taken two Prozac and gone to work. The previous night he had taken Tryptenol to make him sleep, and the drug had caused him to sweat and have nightmares. He said that the day was “a blur” to him and that at work he had found the Sunday paper and had started to look at job opportunities, and had come across the article announcing the multi-million rand sale of the company. He said, “I decided to write the email and by a mad decision I sent it on Ashok’s computer”. He said that during the course of the week he tried to think of what he had written in the email and had tried to retrieve it. He then said the following: 

“I felt we were going to lose our jobs, and the company would be making millions out of it, so I felt that I wanted to tell the truth – stores are going to close, head office is not being bought, and I wanted people to know the truth.”


He said that at the time of the ongoing discussions, a lot of staff members were feeling very uncertain, and that many of them, including De Beer engaged in making derogatory remarks about Cohen and others. He then repeated in his evidence:

“I wanted people to know the truth and that’s why I sent the email. Farrell Cohen had told us not to talk about it because if there are strikes, Massmart won’t buy the company. I felt that I must tell people the truth about this because it’s a lot of rubbish.”


He said that he was not unduly concerned about Ramanoor’s position, because he felt that he (Ramanoor) would have had a disciplinary enquiry, and felt that he would be able to prove that he had not sent the email. He said that he felt  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 842
terrible that Ramanoor had been suspended but did not want to put himself at risk. He said that now he felt terrible about the things he had said about Farrell Cohen, and that he had apologised to him and to Ramanoor. He said that he now had a fast food franchise in Scottburgh, and that his wife had left him. He said that he had stopped taking Prozac, because it made him feel as though he was in control, as though he was “the boss”. 

Under cross examination he was asked squarely, what the purpose of the email had been, and he replied that the purpose was to tell people that they were being sold out, that the directors had made a lot of money and that a lot of the employees were going to lose their jobs. He said that it had taken him about 20 minutes to compose the email. When it was put to him that the document had a logic to it, he said that the day had been a complete “blur” to him, and said that the only way he could explain what he had said in the email was all the pills he was taking. He was asked why he had not sent the message on his own computer, and he replied that he had not wanted to be caught. It was put to him that this in itself was evidence of his rational behaviour. He replied by saying: “I wanted to tell people the truth”. 

He then said that he had been effected by Prozac and that he had been on a “high”. He then went on to say that he had suffered “huge memory loss” and that he had forgotten that he had sent the email, and that it had only come back to him when he was in Ulundi during the week starting 18 June, and was shown the email by a colleague in the Ulundi store. He said that the drug cocktail he was on had “blown his mind”. 

It was put to him that he had tried to incite other employees in order to increase the size of his retrenchment package, and that the email had a very clear logic to it. He replied that he had not known what he was writing at the time. 

When asked why he had not owned up after Ramanoor had been suspended, he replied: “I didn’t want to get caught, I didn’t want to lose all my money”. 

He said that when he saw the email in print, he felt that he had told everyone the truth about what had happened. 

In argument, Mr Chadwick argued that there were a number of aggravating factors which had to be taken into account. He said that it had not been challenged that the email message was offensive, racist, discriminatory and inflammatory, and that it was a carefully crafted document, and not a single aberrant act of an insane person. Secondly, applicant had not had the courage to claim authorship of the document, and had sent the message on a colleague’s computer. Furthermore, he never owned up, even when his colleague had been suspended, and had to be exposed by a lie detector test. He had not apologised on his own initiative, but had to be prompted by De Beer. Finally, he had had from 11–16 June to think about what he had done, but had not taken any steps to stop the message. With regard to mitigating factors, he said that it was accepted that applicant was under stress, but that could never explain or justify what applicant had done. He said that no medical expert had been called to confirm that Prozac could have had the effect on applicant that applicant claimed, and that in any event, what applicant had written and his entire modus operandi had shown that he knew full well what he was doing. He said that it was an objective test that had to be applied in an arbitration forum and that it was of no consequence that  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 843
Cohen or Levenberg had not testified. He said that insofar as the respective credibility of the witnesses was concerned, De Beer had fared much better than applicant. He made reference to the arbitration award issued by myself in the matter of Cronje v Toyota1 (2001) 22 ILJ 735 (CCMA) as well as to the case of Lebowa Platinum Mines Ltd v Hill [1998] 7 BLLR 666 (LAC). Finally, he asked for costs to be awarded against applicant on the basis that applicant’s referral of the matter had been vexatious.

Mr Bezuidenhout for applicant said that respondent’s hands were not clean, in that it had kept its employees in the dark for a long period of time, sowing discontent and uncertainty. He said that applicant was quite aware that he was going to lose his job, and that it was incorrect for De Beer to say that things were merely “uncertain”. He said that what respondent had done was deplorable, in that it had asked managers not to discuss the pending sale with employees for fear that it may cause them to behave in such a way as to place the deal at risk. He said that it was vital to consider applicant’s state of mind at the time. His medication intake was high, he had had an argument with his wife and had been under stress for two years. It was in this context that he had seen the newspaper article and had decided to send the email. He said that if applicant had been thinking rationally, he would never have done such a thing, and would never had jeopardised his substantial retrenchment package. He said that it was noteworthy that it had never been suggested that what applicant had said in his email–other than the derogatory remarks about Jews-was incorrect. He said that what applicant had done was to “blow the whistle” on respondent, that he was telling his fellow employees that they had rights, and that as such he was protected in law. He said that Cohen and Levenberg had not testified, and that it was not known what their take on the email was, and that if one was going to rely on the law of slander, then the subject or victim of the slander had to be heard. He said as such the test was not an objective one. He distinguished the Cronje/Toyota case, saying that the deal had been done, and that the former employer was out of the picture, and that it could not be said that the employment relationship had been destroyed. He said that what had weighed heavily with the disciplinary and appeal chair was the effect on Ramanoor, and not the derogatory remarks about Jews. He then said that it was respondent’s fault that Ramanoor had been suspended for so long, and that applicant could not be held responsible for this. He said that applicant had shown remorse, and had apologised to Ramanoor and Cohen. He said that dismissal was not an appropriate sanction in the circumstances and that the company had deliberately fired applicant in order to save on a hefty retrenchment package. 

Analysis of evidence and argument

As I understand applicant’s case, he submits that:

he cannot be held fully responsible for what he wrote in the email because of his prescription drug intake, and his general state of emotional stress brought about by his deteriorating marriage and the state of anxiety in which he found himself because of his job insecurity. As such, he wishes 

me to make a finding that he was in a state of diminished responsibility because of these various factors, and that he cannot and should not be held liable for making what he concedes are improper and inappropriate remarks about Jewish people. On the other hand, he was at pains to say that, other than these derogatory remarks about Jewish people, he stood by what he said, and felt that he had “told the truth” about what the company was doing to him and his fellow workers. 

The other main leg of applicant’s case is that, in spite of the derogatory remarks about Jewish people, the sanction of dismissal was too harsh. He argued, through his advocate, that the Jews who had been the target of his missive, had not testified, and that without such testimony one could not know how they felt about being so targeted, and that in any event the company had changed hands and that it could not be said that the relationship with the new employer was broken. 

I shall deal first with applicant’s submissions summarised in (a) above. Applicant says that at the time that the incident on 11 June took place, he had taken (the night before) a sleeping pill, on the day of the incident – 2 Prozac, as well as an anti-inflammatory drug (Mobic) and a paracetamol for pain. This “cocktail” of drugs he said, in evidence, and in his written internal appeal, had variously:

“blown my mind,”
“made me feel in control,”
“made me feel comfortable,”
“made me feel as if I was the boss,”
“caused me huge memory loss,”
“made me insane,”
“made me sweat and have nightmares,”
“gave me a rash.”

He said that 11 June had been a “blur” to him, that he had written the email and sent it in a “moment of madness”, and that he could not recall during the week following what he had written in the email. 

applicant did not call a doctor or any other form of expert to testify that any of the drugs he had taken, or a mixture of them all, could have brought about any of the symptoms described. It is trite to say that one cannot accept this sort of vague anecdotal evidence, and I note that Advocate Bezuidenhout, for applicant, only mentioned in passing in argument that I should take into account that applicant’s medication was “up”. In any event, applicant’s own description of how he was allegedly affected by the drug combination he was taking, (see 1 – 8 above), is confused, contradictory and inherently improbable, and I am in full agreement with Mr Chadwick’s reading of the email, as a carefully crafted document, aimed at inciting fellow employees against the company, and not the irrational ravings of someone suffering a temporary bout of insanity. The document itself has a clear logic to it, and purports to come from and speak for the ordinary shop floor workers (“We who work for a minimum wage on the floor and in the offices must stand up and fight these ungodly rich Jews who will kill for money etc”). This, coming from a man whose monthly package was  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 845
R23,600 and who had not even been identified as a candidate for retrenchment, makes applicant’s version even more untenable. He goes on in the email to make a strident demand for an inflated package, and throughout the email, carefully juxtaposes the supposed great wealth of the “rich, greedy, ungodly Jews” with the parlous position of the “workers”. Furthermore, his own evidence of his behaviour during the week 11-18 June, lets him down badly. 

He said that he could not recall what he had said in the email, and tried to retrieve it, yet in the very next breath he says:

“I felt we were going to lose our jobs, and the company would be making millions out of it, so I felt that I wanted to tell the truth – stores are going to close, head office is not being bought, and I wanted people to know the truth”. 


He then testified that he felt that he should let the email go. 

When asked why he had not owned up when Ramanoor was suspended, he said: “I didn’t want to get caught, I didn’t want to lose all my money”. 

Furthermore, applicant did not deny or challenge De Beer’s evidence to the effect that at his meeting with applicant in his office, after applicant had failed the lie detector test, applicant had made no mention of being in any manner affected by prescription drugs. 

These factors, linked with the sophisticated modus operandi of the delayed sending of the email, as well as the use of a colleague’s computer, lead me to conclude that far from being “insane” or “in a blur”, applicant was fully in control of himself, and cannot at this stage rely on wholly unsubstantiated allegations of being in a drug induced state of mind. I accordingly completely reject applicant’s evidence in this regard. I accept that applicant was anxious and under stress, but it goes without saying that that does not even remotely justify his disgraceful conduct. 

The second leg of applicant’s case is that while conceding that the derogatory remarks about Jewish people was wrong, the respondent had over-reacted in dismissing him, that applicant had in fact told the truth about how respondent was treating its employees, that the targets of his email had not testified, and that without such testimony one could not know how they felt about being so targeted, and that in any event the company had changed hands and that it could not be said that the relationship with the new employer was broken. 

I shall deal first with the issue of applicant’s anti-Semitic remarks. His approach appears to be that those remarks were wrong, but those aside, everything else he said was true and correct, and therefore dismissal was inappropriate. Applicant and his representative have missed the point – his anti-Semitic remarks were the primary reason for him being dismissed, and I am in full agreement with the sentiments expressed by the chairman of the disciplinary enquiry. One seldom encounters such a gross and sickening example of this sort of racism, and I, like De Beer who testified for respondent, found it disgusting. I was astonished at Advocate Bezuidenhout’s approach, which was that without the subjective evidence of Cohen and Levenberg, one could not say how they felt about the email, and that therefore one could not judge it objectively. Aside from anything else, this approach gives a clear insight into what his particular thinking on the matter is, ie that such issues are not inherently wrong, but only  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 846
become so depending on the subjective view of the target or victim of the message. 

This approach must be rejected completely, and it is of no consequence that Cohen and Levenberg did not testify. Remarks such as those made by applicant are inherently and gravely wrong – they offend not only Jewish people, but, I would venture to say, they would offend any enlightened or civilized person of whatever cultural or religious persuasion. The grotesque caricatures of Jews which flowed so glibly from applicant’s keyboard, are strikingly similar to those which found favour with the Nazi propagandists of the 1930’s, and it is well known that it was the use of that form of profoundly shameful racist stereotyping, that facilitated the complicity of German civilians in ghettos and the transportation of German Jews. Applicant should be deeply ashamed of himself, and the fact that he comes to this forum seeking reinstatement or compensation, indicates to me that he is not, and that he has not begun to understand how serious an offence he has committed. I shall certainly not reinstate or compensate him, and I have no doubt that no other similar forum in this country would do so. 

The approach I take in this matter is one that is sanctioned by the Labour Court. My award in the matter of Cronje v Toyota (2001) 22 ILJ 735 (CCMA) was taken on review, and was upheld by the Labour Court in the judgment of Gering AJ, in an as yet unreported judgment. It is somewhat ironic, bearing in mind the subject-matter of the case that I am now seized with, that in the Cronje matter, which involved the racial stereotyping of black persons as apes, I said the following at page 223:

“The fact that the offensive, racist stereotype associating black people with apes exists, is not disputed. This is a matter of deep moral, social and cultural sensitivity to black people, and this sort of offensive racial stereotyping is not by any means limited to black people. One recalls the grossly offensive and inflammatory racist caricatures of Jews which were specifically created by the Nazi party in the 1930’s, in order to alienate Jews from other Germans, as a prelude to the horrific social engineering that was to end in the holocaust. Jews were depicted as evil, as thieves, as base moneylenders, as killers of German babies and the like. In a less crude form, these caricatures were deployed by anti-Semitic elements amongst Afrikaners prior to the Second World War. These caricatures were and still are, deeply offensive to Jewish people, and not only to the particular person or leader depicted in the caricature. They offend people’s self image as a cultural or racial entity . . . in the same way, the depiction of a black person as an ape is racist, inflammatory, and inherently wrong.”


I also have taken account of the views of the Labour Court in the matter of Lebowa Platinum Mines Ltd v Hill [1998] 7 BLLR and the strong remarks of Zondo JP in the unreported LAC matter of Crown Chickens Ltd t/a Rocklands v Walter Kapp2 PA1/01. It is manifestly clear, and it is in my view quite proper, in our delicately balanced multi-cultural society, that our courts have and will continue to deal very firmly with the issue of racism, in whatever form it presents itself. 

Dealing with other aspects of the charges against applicant, the fact that he sent the email from a colleague’s computer, and the fact that he failed to come clean when Ramanoor was forced into the deep humiliation of suspension for an  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 847
offence he did not commit, and the fact that he was only persuaded by De Beer to apologise to Ramanoor after he had been exposed by a polygraph test which he was unwilling to undergo, is further evidence of applicant’s reprehensible and indefensible conduct, and which alone would justify his dismissal. I also reject applicant’s representative’s preposterous submissions that, in effect, it is respondent who must be held responsible for the suspension of Ramanoor, and not applicant. 

Applicant’s advocate’s submissions to the effect that applicant had been ‘blowing the whistle” on his employer, and that in fact applicant was protected by law in the writing of the email, is laughable. He must know that the Protected Disclosures Act of 2000, (which he referred to as the “whistle blower’s Act”) offers no such protection. Applicant knew as much as any other employee in the company, and what he and they knew had been communicated to them at a meeting at a Durban hotel only 11 days prior to the writing of the email. He knew that a sale of the business was pending, that most stores would be taken over, that others would be sold as going concerns or closed down, and that certain head office staff would be taken over by the purchaser. He did not know whether or not he was going to be retrenched, and he had absolutely no business whatsoever sending out the sort of email he did. Applicant’s submissions in this regard are spurious and irrelevant. 

I also completely reject applicant’s advocate’s argument to the effect that because the respondent company had changed hands, it could not be said that the relationship between employer and employee was significantly damaged. Applicant committed a very serious offence, which justified his dismissal, and he must be treated no differently than if he had been found culpable of any other serious offence justifying dismissal, such as assault or theft. The Code of Good Practice in schedule 8 of the LRA provides that if the misconduct is of such gravity that it makes a continued employment relationship intolerable, then dismissal is an appropriate sanction. The question whether, in a particular case, the misconduct has made a continued employment relationship intolerable must be judged objectively. The employer’s attitude to the misconduct and its effect on the relationship must be taken into account, although it is not always necessarily the deciding factor, and in the final analysis it is a judgment call that must be made by the judge or arbitrator. The courts have made it clear that an arbitrator may not, at his whim, substitute his or her view for that of the employer, which in this case, has seen fit for the reasons given, to dismiss applicant. In Toyota South Africa Motors (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & Others [2000] 3 BLLR 243 (LAC), (2000) 21 ILJ 340 (LAC) the Court expressly held that the standard for assessing a commissioner’s decision whether a dismissal was fair is not whether the employer acted reasonably, but whether the commissioner exercised his or her powers of review properly. 

The employer in this case has clearly taken the view that applicant’s behaviour has made a continued employment relationship impossible, and I do not intend to interfere with this stance taken by the employer. As an arbitrator, I am only entitled to do so if I find that the sanction imposed by the employer is indefensible in terms of the norms of industrial relations practice, and the values which our legal system is meant to uphold. I do not find that the employer’s penalty is indefensible. I take into account applicant’s length of service, and age,  
[2002] 8 BALR 837 (CCMA) at 848
and his clean record. In spite of these factors, I do not find that dismissal was an inappropriate sanction. 

Finding

Accordingly I find that there was fair cause for dismissal. 

Costs

I have given thought to the issue of the costs application made by Mr Chadwick. 

In terms of section 138(10) a costs order is appropriate where:

“a party, or the person who represented that party in the arbitration proceedings, acted in a frivolous or vexatious manner; 


by proceeding with . . . the dispute in the arbitration proceedings; or
in its conduct during the arbitration proceedings”.

I doubt whether applicant was acting frivolously when he referred this matter to arbitration, but it could be said that the referral was vexatious. What does it mean to act vexatiously, in the context of section 138(10)? The word “vexatious” is defined in the New Century Dictionary of the English Language as:

“causing vexation, annoying, in law, of legal actions – instituted without sufficient grounds and serving only to cause annoyance to the Defendant”. 


The objective nature of vexatious conduct was considered in the matter of Re Alluvial Creek Ltd 1929 CPD 532, where it was stated at 535:

“. . . sometimes an order is given because of something in the conduct of a party which the Court considers should be punished, malice, misleading the Court and things like that, but I think the order may also be granted without any reflection upon the party where the proceedings are vexatious, and by vexatious I mean where they have the effect of being vexatious, although the intent may not have been that they should be vexatious. There are people who enter into litigation with the most upright purpose and a most firm belief in the justice of their cause, and yet whose proceedings may be regarded as vexatious when they put the other side to unnecessary trouble and expense which the other side ought not to bear.”


In my view applicant falls into this category of litigant. This is a matter which should never have come to arbitration, and respondent should not have been put to the undoubtedly considerable cost of defending its entirely correct decision to dismiss applicant. Having said that however, I feel that it would be unduly onerous to award costs against applicant, who has already suffered considerably as a result of his own behaviour. Accordingly, no order is made as to costs. 

Cases referred to


Footnotes
1	  Also Reported at [2001] 3 BALR 213 (CCMA) – Ed.
2	  Also Reported at [2002] 6 BLLR 493 (LAC) – Ed.


End of Document