



Louw v South African Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd & another [2005] JOL 15487 (W)
Judgments Online

Division: Witwatersrand
Case No: 03 / 13581
Hearing Date(s): 29 / 11 / 2004
Judgment Date(s): 16 / 05 / 2005
Bench: BH Mbha J


Keywords


Administrative law — Dismissal of employee — Public service — Administrative action — Review 
Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000 

Mini Summary


A disciplinary committee of the first respondent had found the applicant guilty of misconduct. This led to his dismissal. In the present application, the applicant sought to review and set aside the finding of misconduct and the decision to dismiss.

Bringing the application in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000, the applicant averred that the first respondent in disciplining its employees performs a public function and that the decision to dismiss constituted "administrative action" as defined in the Act. In opposing the review application, the respondents denied that the dismissal amounted to administrative action, but contended that even if it did, the application was premature as internal remedies had not been exhausted.

Held that the dismissal of the applicant was not administrative action, as the first respondent was not performing a public duty or implementing legislation in dismissing the applicant. The court also agreed that internal remedies should first have been exhausted. 

The application was dismissed.

 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 1




[1]    The applicant seeks to review and set aside the decision of a disciplinary committee of the first respondent finding the applicant guilty of misconduct and dismissing him from his employment with the first respondent following the finding.

 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 2

[2]    The misconduct in question consisted of two counts namely;

Acting on behalf of the first respondent in dealing with and authorising payments to Independent Damages Experts CC ("IDE"), without disclosing to the first respondent that the sole member of IDE was his brother, Mr Adriaan Louw; and
Receiving aggregate amounts of R132 792,99 from suppliers to the first respondent with whom he dealt in the course of his employment with the first respondent.

[3]    The second respondent was cited herein in his capacity as the chairman of an internal disciplinary committee appointed in terms of the disciplinary code of the first respondent.

[4]    The application to review and set aside the decision by the second respondent is brought in terms of the guarantee of administrative justice contained in section 33 of the Constitution or in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000 ("PAJA") or under the common law.

[5]    The principal submission made on behalf of the applicant was that the first respondent in disciplining its employees performs a public function and that the decision to dismiss the applicant constituted "administrative action" as defined in PAJA, alternatively constituted "administrative action" in terms of section 33 of the Constitution. 

 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 3

[6]    The first respondent has raised two points in limine contending that the applicant has no cause of action for review because:

His cause of action is based on section 33 of the Constitution and on the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act 3 of 2000, both of which are confined in their operation to "administrative action", and a decision of the second respondent was not "administrative action" as contemplated by either section 33 of the Constitution or PAJA; and
Even if the decision of the second respondent can be treated as "administrative action" for the purposes of PAJA, section 7(2) of PAJA precludes the applicant from applying to this court to review and set aside the decision of the second respondent because the applicant did not exhaust his domestic appeal remedies as prescribed by the code of conduct of the first respondent.

[7]    There is no longer any common law review of administrative action that stands apart from section 33 of the Constitution and PAJA. In Pharmaceutical Manufacturers of South Africa: In re Ex parte President of the Republic of South Africa 2000 (2) SA 674 (CC) Chaskalson P at paragraph [41] said: "Powers that were previously regulated by the common law under the prerogative and the principles developed by the courts to control the exercise of public power are now regulated by the Constitution. . .". The court by a unanimous decision held that under our new  
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 4
Constitutional order the control of public power is always a constitutional matter.

[8]    In Bate Star Fishing (Pty) Ltd v Minister of Environmental Affairs 2004 (4) SA 490 (CC) the court held that the power of the courts to review administrative action no longer flows directly from the common law but from PAJA and the Constitution itself

[9]    It is common cause that for this court to exercise its review power, the applicant must establish that the decision to dismiss him constituted "administrative action" as envisaged in section 1 of PAJA read with section 33 of the Constitution. Only if the applicant establishes this will the court proceed to the next stage of the enquiry, which is to determine whether the decision is reviewable. It is to this issue that I now turn my attention.

[10]    Section 33 of the Constitution provides that:

 "3 (1) Everyone has the right to administrative action that is lawful, reasonable and procedurally fair.

Everyone whose rights have been adversely affected by administrative action has the right to be given written reasons.
National legislation must be enacted to give effect to these rights and must–
provide for the review of administrative action by a court or, where appropriate, and independent and impartial tribunal; 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 5
 (b) impose a duty on the state to give effect to the rights in sub-s (1) and (2); and
promote efficient administration."

[11]    Section 1 of PAJA defines "administrative action" in the following terms:

"Administrative action'" means any decision taken, or any failure to take a decision, by

an organ of State, when–
exercising a power in terms of the Constitution or a provincial Constitution; or
exercising a public power or performing a public function in terms of any legislation or
a natural or juristic person, other than an organ of State, when exercising a public power or performing a public function in terms of an empowering provision, which adversely affects the rights of any person and which has a direct, external legal effect . . ."

[12]    That the first respondent is an organ of State is beyond any doubt. See the case of Rail Commuters Action Group and others v Transnet Ltd 2005 (2) SA 359 (CC) at paragraph [67].

[13]    In support of his contention that the decision to dismiss the applicant constituted "administrative action" counsel for the applicant relied principally 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 6
on the judgements in Administrator Transvaal and others v Zenzile and others 1991 (1) SA 21(A) and Administrator Natal and another v Sibiya and another 1992 (4) SA 532 (A).

In both cases although the dismissal of employees by public authorities were held to be "administrative action". Such action involved the exercise of a statutory power of dismissal which was created by the Public Service Code which had been promulgated as regulations
In Zenzile's case contracts of employment of employees were terminated after they had participated in a work stoppage. The employees had not been given a hearing prior to their summary dismissal. Clause 5 of the Public Service Code provided that the employment of an employee could be terminated either on notice or summarily. Hoexter JA found that the appellant was a public authority whose decision to dismiss involved the exercise of a public power. He said the element of public service injected by statute necessarily entailed that the employees were entitled to the benefit of the application of the principles of natural justice before they could be summarily dismissed for misconduct.
Counsel for the applicant also relied on the decision in Despatch High School v Head of Department of Education, Eastern Cape and others 2003 (1) SA 246 (CKH). The court held that in taking the decision to institute disciplinary proceedings against the third respondent, the first respondent was 'performing a public function in terms of an empowering provision' namely section 18 of the Employment of  
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 7
Educators Act 76 of 1998, and consequently was carrying out an administrative act.
Similarly, in Chirwa v Transnet Ltd and others (WLD case number 1052/03 25 February 2004) the court relied on the principles laid down in the Zenzile decision. The case involved the exercise of statutory powers of dismissal under the South African Transport Services Conditions of Service Act 41 of 1988. Section 2(1)(c) of this Act provides that: "Subject to the provisions of the Act and of the Consolidated Service Conditions, the power of appointing and discharging employees other than those referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b), and of stipulating their conditions of service and salaries, shall be vested in the General Manager".
As can be found in Zenzile and similar cases relied on by applicant involved the statutory power of dismissal which has been exercised by the relevant public authorities rather than a power of dismissal that was derived from a non-statutory source.

[14]    Cape Metropolitan Council v Metro Inspection Services (Western Cape) CC and others 2001 (3) SA 1013 (SCA) is a watershed public employment case. Here the court held at paragraphs [11], [12], and [18] that:

Zenzile is no authority for the proposition that, if a public authority derives its authority to enter into a particular contract from a public power, its authority to terminate the contract similarly derives from a public power, entitling the other contracting party to the benefit of the 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 8
application of the principles of natural justice before cancellation of the contract . . ."
Similarly, in Administrator, Natal and another v Sibiya and another 1992 (4) SA 532 (A,), in which it was said that the decision by a public authority to dismiss employees involved the exercise of a public power, the employees' employment was governed by statutory provisions (at 534E)."
The appellant is a public authority and, and although it derived its power to enter into the contract with the first respondent from statute, it derived its power to cancel the contract form the terms of the contract and the common law. Those terms were not prescribed by statute and could not be dictated by the appellant by virtue of its position as a public authority. They were agreed to by the first respondent, at very substantial commercial undertaking. The appellant when it concluded the contract was therefore not action from a position of superiority or authority by virtue of its being a public authority and, in respect of the cancellation, did not, by virtue of its being a public authority, find itself in a stronger position than the position it would have been in had it been a private institution. When it purported to cancel the contract it was not performing a public duty or implementing legislation; it was purporting to exercise a contractual right founded on the consensus of the parties in respect of a commercial contract In all these circumstances it cannot be said that the appellant was exercising a public power. Section 33 of the Constitution is concerned with the public administration acting as an administrative authority exercising public powers, not with the public 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 9
administration acting as a contracting party from a position no different from what it would have, been in had it been a private individual or institution."

[15]    The decision in Metro Western Cape has been followed in subsequent decisions. See Logbro Properties CC v Bedderson NO and others 2000 (3) SA 460 (SCA) at paragraph 10 where the court held that the public authority's invocation of a power of cancellation of a contract concluded on equal terms with a major commercial undertaking, without any element of superiority or authority deriving from its public position, does not amount to an exercise of public power. Finally, in the recent case of Bullock NO and others v Provincial Government North West Province and another 2004 (5) SA 62 at page 268 paragraph [17] Cloete JA concluded that whether or not conduct (if an organ of state) is "administrative action" would depend on the nature of the power being exercised. Considerations that could be relevant would be the source of the power, the subject matter and whether it involved the exercise of a public duty.

[16]    The situation in this case is analogous to that of the Metro Western Cape case.

Although the first respondent is a public authority which had derived its power to conclude a contract of employment with the applicant from a statute, it derived its power to cancel the contract from the terms of the contract and the common law. 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 10
When the first respondent dismissed the applicant and cancelled his contract it was not performing a public duty or implementing legislation, it was exercising a contractual right. The first respondent was acting as a contracting party from a position no different from what it would have been in had it been a private employer.

[17]    Section 23 of the Constitution provides that every one has the right to fair labour practise. This entrenched right obviously regulates the powers of dismissal of employees. It is clear that flowing from this right that the remedies for any unfair dismissal will be under the fundamental right to fair labour practices as opposed to the fundamental right to administrative action.

[18]    It accordingly follows that the decision to dismiss the applicant was not "administrative action" as contemplated by PAJA read with the provisions of section 33 of the Constitution.

[19]    Counsel for the applicant further attempted to find support for the assertion that the applicant's dismissal constitutes "administrative action" in the provisions of Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services Act 9 of 1989 ("the SATS Act") by which the first responded was established.

[20]    Section 23(5) of the SATS Act provides:

"Without derogating from the generality of the provisions of sub-ss (1), (2) and (4) the Corporation shall have power– 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 11
 (a) to enter into contracts and to perform other legal acts, including the conclusion of contracts with the company for the construction, maintenance and operation of rail commuter services . . ."

". . . generally, to do any other thing or perform any other act whether within or outside the Republic, that may assist the corporation in achieving its objects."

[21]    It was submitted that as much as these above quoted sections enable first respondent to enter into contracts of employment which is a statutory power and hence falls within the definition of administrative action, so too does the power to perform "other legal acts" include the power to terminate such contracts. It is also inferred that section 23(5)(k) confers on first respondent broad powers which must include the power to terminate contracts.

[22]    These latter submissions cannot succeed. While section 23(5) positively creates a statutory power to conclude service contracts, the power to terminate service contracts is significantly not created by the section. Thus the power to terminate contracts remains a power that derives from the common law of contract. It cannot be an "administrative action" as was suggested on behalf of the applicant.

 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 12

[23]    Even if I were to find that the decision to dismiss the applicant was an "administrative action", proceedings for its review are subject to section 7(2) of PAJA which provides that:

Subject to para (c), no court or tribunal shall review an administrative action in terms of this Act unless any internal remedy provided for in any other law has first been exhausted.
. . .
A court or tribunal may, in exceptional circumstances and on application by the person concerned, exempt such person from the obligation to exhaust any internal remedy if the court or tribunal deems it in the interest of justice."

[24]    The disciplinary code of the first respondent provides for an appeal against any decision of dismissal within five working days of the decision. The applicant was informed of that right in the charge-sheet and in the decision of the second respondent. However, he elected not to pursue any internal appeal. Nowhere in his application has he applied for any exemption as prescribed by section 7(2)(c) of PAJA nor has he set out any exceptional circumstances justifying this court to hear his application for a review without him first exhausting his domestic appeal procedures.

[25]    In the circumstances the points in limine raised by the first respondent succeed.

 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 13

[26]    Although I have upheld the special defences raised by the first respondent I have nonetheless found it necessary to also deal with the merits of the review.

[27]    It was argued that the decision to dismiss the applicant fell to be set aside on four principal grounds:

First, the second respondent directed that should the applicant wish to testify in his own defence, he would be required to do so first. Although he later modified this ruling to permit other witnesses to testify before the applicant, he nevertheless required the applicant to excuse himself during such evidence. This, it was submitted was a clear breach of the duty to act fairly and amounted to a denial of the right to be heard.
Second, the evidence concerning the applicant's bank deposit slips was obtained in circumstances in which his rights to privacy were breached and, as such, ought to have been excluded from the evidence.
Third, a letter written by the applicant to the CEO of the first respondent in the midst of the hearing in an endeavour to settle the dispute was wrongly admitted in evidence. This letter, was without prejudice and ought not to have been admitted,
Fourth, the only witness to testify against the applicant was George Mokoena ("Mokoena"). His evidence, however, was virtually entirely hearsay inasmuch as he did little more than 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 14
present a report in respect of which he had no personal knowledge.

[28]    I will not necessarily address these complaints in the order they have been set out above. Before doing so, I need to mention one important preliminary point.

The proceedings that the applicant seeks to review are disciplinary proceedings in an employment law context which are not subject to the same strict procedural requirements before a court of law in a criminal trial. In Premier Mpumalanga v Association of State-Aided Schools 1999 (2) SA 91 (CC) at paragraph [39] the court held that although section 24(b) of the Constitution required that administrative action which affects or threatens legitimate expectations should be fair, it did not mean that in all circumstances a hearing will be required. The court accordingly held that it was well established in our legal system that "what will constitute fairness in a particular case will depend on circumstance of case".

[29]    The use of Unlawfully Obtained Evidence

In respect of the second count in paragraph [22] above the bank deposit slips, on their face, indicate that the payments of R132 729,99 were made into an ABSA account in the applicant's name by suppliers to the first respondent with whom he dealt.
The applicant suggested at the hearing that the deposit slips were obtained by the first responded from his bank and without his 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 15
consent. He therefore contended that the admission of the photocopies of the deposit slips into evidence violated his fundamental right to privacy in terms of Sectionl4 of the Constitution and thus amounted to an irregularity in the proceedings.
This complaint in my view has no basis, While it is not clear how the obtaining of deposit slips from his bank could have breached his right to privacy, what is definite is that according to the evidence of Mokoena, the copies of the deposit slips were provided by a "whistleblower".
In any event, these deposit slips are real evidence of prima facie corrupt behaviour on the part of the applicant. This behaviour is manifestly incompatible with any ongoing employment relationship involving reciprocal duties of trust and good faith.
Significantly, the applicant never testified nor did he call any witness to explain why and how payments were made into his banking account by suppliers to the first respondent with whom he dealt in the course of his normal duties.

[30]    The Ruling that the applicant had to Testify Before Other Witnesses

The contention by applicant that this had amounted to a denial of the right to be heard is misplaced. Nowhere during the hearing did the applicant indicate any positive intention to testify. In fact, in paragraph 9.61 of his founding affidavit he says "Even now I am uncertain as to whether I would have testified, had the 
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 16
choice ever been presented to me after Mr Van Niekerk had testified".
The ruling of the second respondent that the applicant had to testify before other witnesses or absent himself from proceedings during their evidence if he wished to reserve the right to testify after them, did not in my view compromise the fairness of the applicant's disciplinary hearing. This ruling is compatible with the much higher standard of procedural fairness required in criminal proceedings before a court of law.

[31]    The Reliance Upon Hearsay Evidence

As I have mentioned earlier, we are here concerned with the requirements of procedural fairness in a disciplinary tribunal in the employment context where the party accused of misconduct was a senior management employee. Such a tribunal does not have a power of subpoena. Accordingly rules of hearsay evidence applicable to judicial proceedings cannot simply be imposed on such a tribunal as a requirement of procedural fairness.
Although normally less weight will be attached to hearsay evidence, in this case the applicant led no evidence at all to refute the hearsay evidence against him, nor did he put up a version in response to the evidence of Mokoena.
Neither did the applicant give evidence to refute the real evidence of the copies of the bank deposit slips indicating that he had  
[2005] JOL 15487 (W) at 17
received aggregate payments of R132 792,99 from suppliers of his employer. Having chosen to remain silent in the face of the copies of the deposit slips, he cannot complain that the second respondent found no reason to reject the prima facie case of serious misconduct that was disclosed by the copies of the bank deposit slips.

[32]    The Admission of the "Without Prejudice" Letter

After hearing submissions on the admissibility of the letter written by the applicant, the second respondent ruled that it be admitted into evidence.
It has not been 'demonstrated that the admission of the evidence from the letter was irregular.
In any event this complaint can only vitiate the proceedings if any irregularity in the admission of the letter was decisive of the finding of misconduct against the applicant. As the second respondent did not rely on the letter in his finding for purposes of treating the deposit slips as evidence against the applicant, its admission does not constitute a reviewable irregularity.

[33]    Having upheld the points in limine raised by the first respondent and having found that the review has no merits. I make the following order:

The application is dismissed with costs.

Appearance:
Adv Gilbert Marcus SC, Webber Wentzel Bowens (At); Adv Matthew Chaskalson, (R)


End of Document