



University of Kwazulu-Natal v Independent Newspapers (Pty) Ltd and others [2018] JOL 40414 (KZD)
Judgments Online

Division: KwaZulu Natal Local Division, Durban
Case No: 8977 / 2017
Hearing Date(s): 08 / 08 / 2018
Judgment Date(s): 17 / 09 / 2018
Bench: Koen J


Keywords


Civil Procedure — Final interdict — Requirements

Mini Summary


The second respondent was a journalist employed by the first respondent. After receiving a tip-off from a whistle-blower about people selling positions for prospective students at the applicant’s medical school, the second respondent published an article in the first respondent’s newspaper, setting out the results of her investigation into the allegation. That led to several sources with further information contacting her, resulting in her authoring numerous further articles which were published. In July 2016, the applicant appointed accountants to conduct a forensic investigation. A full report setting out the findings of the forensic investigation was provided to the applicant. The applicant ignored the second respondent’s request for access to the report or the summary thereof. The second respondent then obtained a copy of the summary from a source who made it available on condition of anonymity, and published an article based on the summary. The events which followed included student protest action on the applicant’s campus and the involvement of the Hawks in the investigation. In August 2017, the applicant learnt of the second respondent’s intention to publish a further article. It stated that such publication would have been detrimental to ongoing investigations and pending proceedings as well as harmful to the reputations of those the respondents intended to name. It accordingly sought and obtained an interim interdict and a rule nisi preventing the publication for the time being. The court then had to consider the matter on the extended return date.

Held that the applicant was entitled to rely on the right to the preservation of confidentiality in its own information. An interdict was the appropriate relief to preserve that confidentiality. 

In order to have the rule nisi confirmed and a final order granted, the applicant had to satisfy the requirements for a final interdict on a balance of probability. Those are a clear right; an injury actually committed or reasonably apprehended; and the absence of any other satisfactory remedy available to the applicant. 

The question for determination was whether the contents of the summary and report as yet unpublished by the applicant remained confidential to the applicant, and accordingly, whether the applicant had a clear right to prevent the publication thereof. The court concluded that the applicant’s right to the continued confidentiality of the parts of its summary and report which had not yet published, in the circumstances of this case outweighed the respondents’ right to publish what was contained in the summary and report and not yet published. A final interdict was thus granted.

 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 2

KOEN J  

Introduction

[1]    This is the extended return date of a rule nisi which is contained in paragraph 2 of the court order granted on 5 August 2017. It provides as follows:

"THAT a Rule nisi do hereby issue calling upon the Respondents to show cause, if any, before this Honourable Court on the 5 September 2017 at 9H30 or as soon thereafter as the matter may be heard, why, pending the confirmation of the rule, an order in the following terms should not be granted:

THAT the First and Second Respondents are directed to retract and remove the published article, dated 3 August 2017 and headed '#UKZN MedBust: University raided over corruption claims' from all forms of publication, be it press, online and/or social media forthwith;
THAT the First and Second Respondents are directed to issue a statement to the public rectifying the factual position pertaining to the search and seizure operation undertaken by the Applicant and to clarity that a raid did not take place at the Applicant's campuses by the South African Police Services within twenty four (24) hours of the grant of this Order;
THAT the First Respondent be and is hereby interdicted from publishing an article in THE SUNDAY TRIBUNE newspaper, or any other newspaper, on Sunday, 6 August 2017 which refers to the contents of the KPMG forensic report that has been prepared on behalf of the Applicant;
THAT the First and Second Respondents be and are hereby interdicted from publishing in the press, on the internet and/or in the social media or any other media, any information pertaining to the release of the KPMG forensic report and its content;
THAT the First and Second Respondents are directed to pay the costs of the application, jointly and severally, the one paying the other to be absolved." 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 3
Paragraphs 2.3 and 2.4 of the rule were ordered to operate as interim orders with immediate effect when the rule was issued.

[2]    The applicant seeks confirmation of paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 of the rule nisi, with paragraph 2.4 amended to read:

The respondents be and are hereby interdicted from publishing in the press, on the internet and/or in the social media or any other media, any information pertaining to the contents of the summary of the KPMG forensic report and the contents of the KPMG report itself, beyond that already published."

The relief in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.3 of the rule nisi

[3]    The applicant does not seek confirmation of the relief in paragraphs 2.1-2.3 of the notice of motion. It contends in that regard that the relief claimed in those paragraphs is moot due to the steps taken by the respondents on 6 August 2017 in publishing the article "GAGGED! Brakes on medical school expose", the "Matter of Fact" contained therein, and the interim interdict that was granted when the rule was issued.

[4]    The respondents initially disputed that the relief in paragraphs 2.1-2.3 has become moot, contending that the interim interdict should not have been granted as an interdict is not a remedy for a past alleged invasion of rights.1 That criticism is however misplaced. Firstly, no interim interdict was granted in respect of the relief claimed in paragraphs 2.1 to 2.3 of the notice of motion. Secondly, the relief claimed in those paragraphs of the rule nisi issued is not confined to a past invasion of rights but was aimed at preventing further alleged harm arising from the publication of the 3 August 2017 article in the future.

[5]    The respondents also contended that they were entitled to a consideration of whether the application was justified (in relation to the 3 August article) in the first place, so that they can remedy any negative perception created by the application that they were obliged to print a retraction, when they were not. As mentioned earlier however, no interim relief was granted in respect of the relief in paragraphs 2.1-2.3  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 4
of the notice of motion. Accordingly I am not persuaded that objectively speaking any negative perception can be said to arise.

[6]    The effect of the applicants not seeking confirmation of paragraphs 2.1-2.3 of the notice of motion is tantamount to the applicant abandoning that relief. The fact that it was claimed as part of the rule nisi now largely has only academic interest. At most it might retain possible relevance on the question of costs. Not surprisingly, the respondents' counsel in argument did not persist with any opposition to the applicant's approach of not addressing the relief in those paragraphs further. This judgment shall accordingly not deal any further with the relief in those paragraphs, save insofar as it might affect the question of costs.

The citation of the respondents

[7]    The publisher of the Sunday Tribune Newspaper and the IOL website ("IOL") against whom the relief is sought, is not Independent Media (Pty) Limited, the first respondent as originally cited. The Sunday Tribune is published by Independent Newspapers (Proprietary) Limited. The publisher of the IOL website is Independent Online (Proprietary) Limited. The first respondent, as originally cited, is the holding company of Independent Newspapers (Proprietary) Limited and Independent Online (Proprietary) Limited.

[8]    In their heads of argument the respondents raised but did not place reliance on this error. In argument they indicated that the applicant's motion to amend the citation of the first respondent (which would be to the notice of motion) to "Independent Newspapers (Pty) Limited" and to join Independent Online (Pty) Limited and reflect it as the third respondent, was not opposed. That is a sensible approach to what is simply an error in description.2 The position is not dissimilar to that in Foxlake Investments v Ultimate Raft Foundation Design3 where the Supreme Court of Appeal held that:

"when the summons was served on the registered address of both Foxway and Foxlake, Foxway recognised its connection with the claim notwithstanding the error in its description. 

 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 5

The amendment sought by the respondents in the Court a quo did not seek to introduce a new legal entity as the first defendant. It merely sought to correct the incorrect description of the defendant and encourage the proper ventilation of the real disputes between the creditor (the respondents) and the debtor (appellant). The question of prejudice to the appellants does not arise. The summons was served on the true debtor in which summons the creditor was claiming payment of the debt from the debtor."

[9]    Independent Newspapers (Pty) Ltd and Independent Online (Pty) Ltd were fully aware that they were the targets of the application and recognised its connection with the relief sought, notwithstanding the error in its description, hence their compliance with the interim interdict.

[10]    An order was accordingly granted that:

The citation of the first respondent in the notice of motion is amended to "Independent Newspapers (Pty) Limited";
"Independent Online (Pty) Limited" is joined as the third respondent.

The heading to this judgment gives effect to that order.

The facts

[11]    The following background facts giving rise to the issue of the rule nisi are common cause or not seriously in dispute, alternatively, represent the version of the respondents which the applicant is not able to dispute:4

The second respondent, a journalist employed by the first respondent, became aware of alleged fraud perpetrated at the applicant university during February 2016 when a whistle-blower tipped her off about people selling positions for prospective students at the applicant's medical school, the Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela School of Medicine ("the NRMSM"). After almost six months of investigation including consultations with various sources who spoke to her on condition of anonymity, she published her first article in the Independent Newspaper on 26 June 2016 under the headline "For Sale: a place in med school". As a result of that exposé several sources with further information contacted her, resulting in her authoring  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 6
numerous further articles which were published. More than 20 articles were published by the Sunday Tribune alone.
During July 2016, the applicant appointed accountants KPMG to conduct a forensic investigation to determine, inter alia, whether admissions to the NRMSM complied with the NRMSM's prescribed policies, to investigate bribery and corruption at the NRMSM, to investigate certain students who may have misrepresented their race with a view to gaining entry into the NRMSM, and to make recommendations.
It became publicly known subsequently that a full report ("the report") relating to the findings of KPMG was provided to the applicant on 7 November 2016. The second respondent learnt from her sources that a summary ("the summary") of the report was tabled at a meeting of the applicant's council in November 2016. Both reports are confidential to the applicant. The applicant maintains however that it conducted its own further investigations which have revealed that KPMG's reports were not correct in all respects.
When it became apparent by the end of January 2017 that the applicant would not be releasing the report or the summary, the second respondent applied to the applicant in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act5 ("PAIA") for access to the report. The second respondent did not receive any response to the PAIA application and to date has not taken further action in regard thereto, as shortly after the making of the PAIA application, the summary was "leaked". She obtained a copy of the summary from a source who made it available on condition of anonymity.
The second respondent thereafter prepared an article based on the summary. This was published by the Sunday Tribune and the IOL on 12 February 2017. This article provided a broad overview of the summary but also quoted what purports to be actual extracts from the text thereof. It recorded that the "report" had been leaked. Accordingly, the respondents argue, the article reveals that they were in possession of the report since February 2017, that its contents were therefore in the public domain, and that this should have been disclosed in the applicant's founding papers given that the application was moved as one of urgency. That was however not the true factual position. Only the report had been leaked. A comparison of the quotations in the article to the summary and the report would have confirmed to the applicant that the respondents were in possession of the summary and not the  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 7
report. In the founding affidavit the Vice Chancellor of the applicant records that he is not sure if the second respondent has a copy of the report or not and states that "[if] in fact the Second Respondent is in possession of the KPMG report, this has been obtained by unauthorised means".
The article created substantial further public interest and several new sources spoke to the second respondent providing her with further information and documentation. On 20 February 2017, the second respondent was called to a meeting with three senior investigators from the HAWKS and Avril Sahadew, the applicant's forensic investigator. She ascertained that certain of the information that she had already confirmed was also in the possession of the HAWKS. The HAWKS and Sahadew asked her to withhold publication of the facts she had uncovered which identified some of the perpetrators until they had made arrests. She agreed to that request after consultation with the editor of the Sunday Tribune, Mr Xaba.
In May 2017 the South African Police Services arrested three people. Following the arrests, the second respondent confirmed with the HAWKS that the agreement to refrain from publishing was no longer in effect and she wrote an exposé, related to the arrests, which was published by the Sunday Tribune on 14 May 2017.
In the second last week of June 2017, the second respondent learnt that the applicant's council had held a meeting with the student representative council ("SRC"). After the meeting, council members and members of the SRC spoke to the second respondent and mentioned that the report had not yet been handed to the police. Following that the second respondent in writing posed certain questions to the applicant. The applicant responded in the form of a general media statement, without answering the second respondent's specific questions.
The second respondent was interviewed on the nationally broadcast television programme "Carte Blanche" regarding the events at the NRMSM on 2 July 2017.
On 28 July 2017, the second respondent addressed further questions to the applicant relating to the continued strike by students at the NRMSM. The applicant confirmed in reply that the release of the report to the SRC would be discussed at the next council meeting and confirmed its commitment to cooperate with the HAWKS.
By 8 August 2017, the HAWKS officially confirmed with the second respondent that they had not yet been handed a copy of the report. 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 8
In the week of 31 July to 6 August 2017, the respondents learned that the students at the NRMRM had gone on strike, that regular protests were being conducted on campus, and that the situation was volatile. One of the main complaints was that the report had not been made public. On the morning of 3 August 2017, students were protesting on campus, many holding up banners calling for the report. The second respondent and a photographer attended. They found the Metro Police and Public Order Policing officials on campus and a "raid" in progress in the administration buildings with documents and computers being seized. This gave rise to the 3 August 2017 article, which was posted on IOL in the morning, which recorded that the "university appointed independent forensic audit teams for the raid who worked in tandem with the SAPS Public Order Policing unit".
At 2pm on 3 August 2017, the Vice Chancellor of the applicant held a press briefing, which was attended by the second respondent, at which he stated that the raid conducted that morning was performed by the forensic investigators.
In a further article published on the IOL website on the afternoon of 3 August 2017 the second respondent indicated that "The Sunday Tribune will unpack the KPMG forensic report and the role players behind the syndicate in the print edition on Sunday, August 6". The applicant contends, albeit in reply, that such publication would have been detrimental to ongoing investigations and pending proceedings as well as harmful to the reputations of those the respondents intended to name.
The applicant accordingly sought and obtained an interim interdict and a rule nisi preventing the publication for the time being.
The second respondent first received an indication that the applicant threatened an application late on the afternoon of Friday 4 August 2017 when the first respondent's editor received an email to that effect at 4:18pm demanding an undertaking by 4:30pm that the respondents would not publish the intended article relating to the report. Mr Xaba, who is not authorised to decide whether to instruct external attorneys, sent an email to Independent's internal legal department for guidance. Thereafter the respondents interacted with the respondents' attorney, Mr Louw, in Cape Town. He telephoned the applicant's attorneys and placed himself on record. He took preliminary instructions from the respondents, and thereafter conditionally agreed to accept service of the application papers by email. The papers were sent to him by email at 9:55am on Saturday 5 August 2017. He then endeavoured to arrange counsel in Durban while reading the papers, but was  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 9
unsuccessful. He requested the applicant's counsel in the light of his predicament to request the Judge hearing the matter to receive his submissions via telephone.6 That request was communicated but refused by the learned Judge dealing with the urgent application.

The parties' contentions

[12]    Arising from the above facts:

The applicant claims that the report, and the summary thereof, was private to it, and hence confidential, entitling it to prevent publication thereof;
The respondents, whilst for the most part seemingly not disputing the confidentiality of the reports, assert that due to the publication of the prior articles the confidentiality in and to the report, or at least the contents of the summary, either in full or to the extent that it was quoted from and hence came into the public domain, was lost.
Further, the respondents complain:
that the applicant had not disclosed in its founding papers that to its knowledge the respondents were in possession of a copy of the summary and had quoted therefrom in articles published prior to the 3 August 2017 article, where, if it had done so, the court granting the interim relief might have refused to grant relief because what was sought to be interdicted was already in the public domain;
that the applicant approached the court on two hours' formal notice to the respondents for urgent relief, that the application was moved in the respondents' absence, on a Saturday, despite attempts by the respondents to secure representation for the hearing.

The interim interdict

[13]    I deal firstly with the issues alluded to in paragraphs 12(c) above.

[14]    The applicant was entitled to rely on the right to the preservation of confidentiality in its own information. An interdict is the appropriate relief to preserve  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 10
that confidentiality.7 The threat by the respondents to unpack the report in the print edition of the Sunday Tribune on 6 August 2017, accepting the report to be confidential, would constitute a breach of a clear right, or at least a prima facie right, which was reasonably apprehended and imminent when the application was launched. That would justify the grant of not only the rule nisi, but also the interim interdict, subject to the other requirements for such an interdict being satisfied.

[15]    The respondents' complaint of the absence of a full and frank disclosure is based on the rule in Schlesinger v Schlesinger8 which obliges an applicant in an ex parte application to make the fullest disclosure to the Judge hearing the application, not only of the facts in its favour, but also those against the sought after relief. The respondents initially maintained that the applicant failed fundamentally in not telling Kruger J of the previous articles published, in particular those published in February 2017 referring to "the report" and containing quotations from it (more correctly quotations from the summary). This criticism was however not persisted with in argument by the respondents, and correctly so. As much as the articles published by the respondent might have created the impression that the report, or portions thereof, were in the public domain, it was not known for certain by the applicant that the respondents were in possession of the report, as opposed to the summary. The applicant at best for the respondents should have realised from the quotations that the summary had been leaked and might be in the public domain, but not necessarily that the report had been leaked. The reference to the "report" in the article taken at face value would have suggested to it that the report might now also have been leaked, otherwise how would the respondents be able to "unpack" it in the Sunday newspaper. Where quotations in the articles corresponded to the contents of the summary, the threatened publication of findings in the report constituted an imminent breach of a clear right to the confidentiality it enjoyed in the report.

[16]    At best the applicant may perhaps be criticised for having drawn that conclusion, rather that disclosing all the facts and allowing the court to come to that conclusion. As a purely procedural criticism it might not be without validity, but  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 11
significant is that if disclosed, it would not have caused the court not to have issued the rule with the interim relief.

[17]    As regards the short notice I have been asked by the respondents to prescribe a procedure similar to that in South African Airways SOC v BDFM Publishers (Pty) Limited9 for urgent matters in this Court to protect the rights of the media and other similarly situated litigants faced with urgent applications. In my view that is unnecessary having regard to the practice directives of this Court. Practice directive 10 in this Division achieves workable certainty whilst permitting sufficient flexibility to cater for the various situations where urgency might be alleged. Ultimately issues such as whether the service of the application papers is adequate, having regard to any potential prejudice to the respondents, is determined by the judge hearing the urgent application.

[18]    Where the matter is now argued on the extended return date, the respondents' complaints regarding a lack of adequate time to oppose the issue of the rule nisi and the grant of the interim interdict will at best affect the question of costs. The complaints of the respondents were however not persisted with, in my view correctly so. No sustainable criticism can be attached to the conduct of the applicant having regard to, inter alia, the practice directive of this Court and even the decision in South African Airways SOC v BDFM Publishers (Pty) Limited. There was urgency to securing the interim relief on the Saturday in view of the imminent publication which would seek to unpack the contents of the "report" in the Sunday Tribune of the next day. To the extent that it is competent for me to comment thereon, there was sufficient justification for any alleged non-compliance with any rules and directives prescribed for urgent applications, to the extent that these might have occurred. This Court is not sitting as a court of appeal on that order.

The test on the return date

[19]    In order to have the rule nisi confirmed and a final order granted, the applicant must satisfy the requirements for a final interdict on a balance of probability. These are: 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 12
(a) a clear right;

an injury actually committed or reasonably apprehended;10 and
the absence of any other satisfactory remedy available to the applicant.11

[20]    Whether an applicant has a clear right is a matter of substantive law and must be proven by the applicant on a balance of probabilities.12

The confidentiality of the summary and the report

[21]    The question for determination is whether the contents of the summary and report as yet unpublished by the applicant remains confidential to the applicant, and accordingly, whether the applicant had a clear right to prevent the publication thereof.

[22]    The respondents do not dispute the confidentiality of the summary and of the report. They contend however that the summary report was provided to the second respondent several months ago by a source and that once that was done any confidentiality in the report was lost.13 Specifically they contend that once she had received the leaked summary from her source, the second respondent did not act wrongfully or unlawfully, as the respondents do not owe the applicant any duty of confidentiality.14 The loss of confidentiality they contend, was compounded (but not established) by the publication regarding the fact of, and excerpts from, the summary report in several articles since February 2017.15 They maintain that the suggestion by the applicant, in its replying affidavit, that parts of the report remain confidential because not all of the report has been published is without merit. They further  
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 13
maintain that in the final analysis, it must also be borne in mind that the applicant is not without an alternative remedy – it can pursue a claim for damages (if it can establish such claim) which the first respondent has the financial ability to pay, and this being adequate redress.

[23]    I am not persuaded that the summary of the report, or even the report itself being leaked by unlawful means, as opposed to voluntarily being distributed by the applicant to the public, thus coming into the "public domain", would result in the report and the summary losing their status as confidential documents. Our constitutional dispensation recognising fundamental human rights including amongst others the rights to privacy, dignity and the like, would frown on the confidence attaching to a document being lost due to unlawful leaks (even if the second respondent is innocent thereof), no less than for example evidence in a criminal trial being obtained by unlawful means being inadmissible. There is a public interest of a high order in preserving confidentiality within an organisation.16 In my view the contents of the summary and the report remained privileged as being confidential to the applicant.

[24]    The reluctance to interdict the publication of confidentially obtained information because it has been leaked, and has come into the public domain, is more appropriately addressed on the procedural basis that a court will not grant an interdict where it will be ineffective and of no practical effect, such as where the proverbial horse has bolted. But where for example further and more wide spread publication of confidential information, and resultant prejudice are sought to be avoided, an interdict might still nevertheless be granted. Each case must be decided on its own facts.

[25]    However, even if the privilege of confidentiality attaching to a confidential report might be lost as a result of an unlawful leak, I agree with the applicant's submissions that the respondents' opposition was misplaced in that:

whilst the respondents might have come into possession of the summary, only those portions that have been published by the respondents would be in the public domain. The balance of the summary would remain confidential; 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 14
(b) the report itself remained confidential;
the article published, annexure "MX1", does not quote from the summary nor contain any references to its contents, but quotes the applicant's vice chancellor and principal;
the article published, annexure "MX2", whilst recording that the report had been leaked to the respondents, maintained the applicant's confidentiality to the extent that it did not "name and shame" those identified in the summary;
the published articles have not, this far, identified any individuals allegedly implicated, or otherwise revealed detail which could jeopardise the investigations;
any publication of those portions of the summary which were not in the public domain before the interdict was granted, which includes names of persons allegedly implicated, could lead to misinformation and jeopardise the ongoing investigations.
whilst the respondents previously respected the applicant's confidentiality when reporting, the threat on 3 August 2017 to "unpack the report and the individuals behind it" indicated that the respondents intended to violate that confidentiality. But for the interdict, the respondents could proceed and publish a list of which they described as "role players we are aware of being involved";
the unredacted version which was published online, identified individuals who are not implicated in the summary, thus emphasising the dangers with such a publication where there are ongoing investigations.

Balancing the competing interests

[26]    In our present political discourse where allegations of fraud, corruption and State capture abound, the importance of a vigilant and vigorous press and the benefit of penetrative investigative journalism should, of course, never be underestimated and indeed encouraged. A curtailment of publication constitutes a curtailment of the respondents' rights and the "tangible interest" of the public to remain informed. But it is not an absolute right.

[27]    Often the balancing of the competing interests is a difficult exercise. In NM and others v Smith and others (Freedom of Expression Institute as amicus curiae)17 Langa CJ observed in the context of that case that: 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 15
"the inescapable conclusion is that a reasonable journalist or a reasonable publisher would have foreseen the possibility that there was not consent. Because the possible harm was great, the effort necessary to avoid that harm minimal and the benefit of publishing the names negligible, a reasonable journalist or publisher would have taken steps to avoid that harm. . . . ."

[28]    The respondents maintain that in this matter, the public interest outweighs any right of confidentiality that may be found to still attach to the summary report.18 The applicant however states that it does not seek to prevent the respondents from publishing what the investigations ultimately reveal. It simply seeks to keep its confidential information confidential and to defer publication until such time as the investigations are complete and it can be reasonably satisfied that the information in the summary and report and the conclusions drawn as a result thereof are full, fair and reasonable.

[29]    In striking a fair balance between the rights of the applicant to confidentiality against the right of freedom of speech and expression of the respondents19 the following are apposite:

Although some of the information that had been published was already in the public domain, the balance of the summary and the report were not. There is no reason to deny the applicant's its right to confidentiality in respect of that balance, in circumstances where the confidentiality is not in dispute and the respondents intended to disclose "role players" identified before the correctness of the report had been verified and/or the report finalised.
Name and shaming before proper verification but based on distorted facts can result in serious potential damage to the reputations of individuals thus wrongly identified which no claim for damages can redress adequately. Striking an appropriate balance favours protecting the applicant's right to the confidentiality of an ongoing investigation not yet ripe for disclosure above premature publication.
It has not been suggested that the applicant is seeking mala fide to protect the perpetrators of the alleged fraud. 
[2018] JOL 40414 (KZD) at 16

[30]    In my view the applicant's right to the continued confidentiality of the parts of its summary and report which have not yet published, in the circumstances of this case outweighs the respondents' right to publish what is contained in the summary and report and not yet published. Paragraph 2.4 of the rule nisi in the amended form sought should accordingly be confirmed.

Costs

[31]    The applicant was entitled to approach the court for the issue of the rule nisi and interim relief as a matter of urgency and in the manner it did. Although the applicant has not persisted with the relief claimed in paragraphs 2.1-2.3 of the rule nisi, the costs relating and incidental thereto is not such as to justify a separate costs order against the applicant. The major part of the papers and the argument was devoted to whether the applicant was entitled to the continued confidentiality in its summary and report to the extent not yet published. The applicant was successful in that regard. There is no reason why the costs should not follow that result.

The order:

[32]    An order is accordingly granted that:

The respondents be and are hereby interdicted from publishing in the press, on the internet and/or on the social media or any other media, any information pertaining to the contents of the summary of the KPMG forensic report and the contents of the KPMG report itself, beyond that already published.
The respondents jointly and severally are directed to pay the costs of the application.


Footnotes
1	Stauffer Chemicals Chemical Products Division of Chesebrough-Ponds (Pty) Ltd v Monsanto Company 1988 (1) SA 805 (T) at 809F [also reported at [1988] 3 All SA 279 (]T) -– Ed.
2	Blaauwberg Meat Wholesalers CC v Anglo Dutch Meats (Exports) Ltd 2004 (3) SA 160 (SCA), at para [18] [also reported at [2004] 1 All SA 129 (SCA); [2003] JOL 12149 (SCA) -– Ed].
3	 [2016] ZASCA 54 para [14].
4	To the extent that there is any material factual dispute, the matter must be decided on the version of the respondents, save where the respondents do not deny allegations made by the applicant, in accordance with the test set out in Plascon Evans Paints Ltd v Van Riebeeck Paints (Pty) Ltd 1984 (3) SA 623 (A) [also reported at [1984] 2 All SA 366 (A) –- Ed].
5	Act 2 of 2000.
6	 This request was based on an alleged practice in the Labour Court as well as the case of Els v Weideman and others 2011 (2) SA 126 (SCA) [also reported at [2010] JOL 26515 (SCA); [2011] 2 All SA 246 (SCA) -– Ed], where Cape Town counsel appeared via telephone before the Presiding Judge hearing the case in Pretoria.
7	South African Airways SOC v BDFM Publishers (Pty) Ltd and others 2016 (2) SA 561 (GJ) paras [13] and [25]-[27] [also reported at [2016] 1 All SA 860 (GJ); [2016] JOL 35097 (GJ) -– Ed].
8	 1979 (4) SA 342 (W) [also reported at [1979] 3 All SA 780 (W) -– Ed].
9	SA Airways SOC v BDFM Publishers fn7.
10	Municipal Council of Johannesburg v Robinson Gold Mining Co Ltd 1923 WLD 99. The test for apprehension is an objective one and mere assertions of fear are insufficient. The facts grounding the apprehension must be set out in the application to enable the court to judge whether the fears are well grounded – see Grant-Dalton v Win and others 1923 WLD 180. The injury must be a continuing one: the court will not grant an interdict restraining an act already committed – Condé Nast Publications Ltd v Jaffe 1951 (1) SA 81 (C) at 86 [also reported at [1951] 1 All SA 214 (C) –- Ed].
11	Setlogelo v Setlogelo 1914 AD 221. The courts will not, in general, grant an interdict when the applicant can obtain adequate redress by an award of damages – see UDC Bank Ltd v Seacat Leasing and Finance Co and another 1979 (4) SA 682 (T) at 695D-696C [also reported at [1979] 4 All SA 825 (T) -– Ed].
12	 LTC Harms 'Interdicts' in Joubert (ed) Lawsa (2ed) vol 11 para [397] and the authorities there cited.
13	SA Airways SOC v BDFM Publishers fn7 at paras [30]-[39] referring to a number of cases including South African Broadcasting Corporation v Avusa Ltd and another 2010 (1) SA 280 (GSJ).
14	 SABC v Avusa Ltd fn13 para [18].
15	 Their contention is that the confidentiality of the information had already been lost and that the information is within the public domain by virtue of past publication of excerpts from the summary on 3 February 2017, as per "MX1" and on 12 February 2017 as per "MX2".
16	Lion Laboratories Ltd v Evans and others [1984] 2 ALL ER 417 (CA) at 433c_e.
17	 2007 (5) SA 250 (CC) at para [111], see also para [112] [also reported at 2007 (7) BCLR 751 (CC) -– Ed].
18	See SA Airways v BDFM Publishers fn7 para [65].
19	Tshabalala-Msimang and another v Makhanya and others 2008 (6) SA 102 (W) at 42 [also reported at [2007] JOL 20547 (W); 2008 (3) BCLR 338 (W) –- Ed].

Appearance:
Adv AM Annandale SC, MS MA Sponneck, Shepstone & Wylie (At); Adv LB Broster SC with MS SA Clarence, Lionel Murray Schwormstedt & Louw, C/o, Berkowitz Cohen Wartski (R)


End of Document