



Molio / Independent Counselling and Advisory Services Southern Africa [2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAJB1404-22
Date: 07/06/2022
Before: JW Thee Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Dereliction of duty — Employee spending excessive time on private phone calls during working hours — Dismissal fair.
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Breach of Covid-19 policy — Employee reporting for duty while exhibiting symptoms of Covid-19 in spite of instruction to stay at home — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a clinical administrator, was dismissed after being found guilty on a number of charges, including not following company procedures, spending excessive time on personal phone calls at the respondent’s expense while working from home, criticising employees of the respondent’s client and failing to comply with Covid-19 procedures by reporting for work after showing symptoms of the disease. The applicant claimed that the complaints had surfaced during an unresolved grievance and that she had been cleared by her doctor to return to work.

The Commissioner rejected the applicant’s claim that she had been under the impression that she could make private calls from home and that the cost would be deducted from her monthly salary. Moreover, she had tried to give the impression that she was performing work while conducting personal conversations. During one of these conversations, she had uttered unflattering remarks about the respondent and its client’s employees. The applicant had also breached the company’s Covid-19 policy by reporting for work while having symptoms. Although the respondent had not applied “progressive” discipline, this was not necessary in serious cases where the trust relationship had been broken. The applicant had shown no remorse and a warning would have served no purpose. The respondent has a fair reason for dismissing the applicant.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation 
This is the award in the arbitration between Lerato Molio, the applicant and ICAS Southern Africa, the respondent. 
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1024
The arbitration hearing took place on 8 April and 19 May 2022 at the offices of the CCMA in Johannesburg. 
The respondent was represented by Mr Mlungizi Mabuza from its legal Department.
The applicant was present and was represented by her attorney Mr Duncan Sithole.
The arbitration proceedings were conducted in English and were digitally recorded. 
Only the respondent submitted a bundle of documents which were what they purport to be. 
The parties were afforded an opportunity to submit written heads of argument by 25 May 2022. 

Background to the dispute
The applicant was employed as a Clinical Administrator. She started her employment relationship with the respondent on 1 July 2015 and earned R12 500 per month.
The dispute arose when the applicant was notified to appear before a disciplinary hearing which was held on 10–13 December 2021 on the following charges:
Dereliction of duties, spending time on outbound calls when scheduled to be on inbound calls.
Dishonesty in that you abused the company resources by spending large amounts of time on private outbound calls whilst entrusted to work from home, thereby also decreasing availability on lines.
Tarnishing ICAS reputation and brand by using company resources to criticise actions with employees that work for ICAS client.
Failure to comply with company’s Covid-19 procedures. 
She was found guilty on the charges at the conclusion of the hearing and was dismissed on 6 January 2022.
Aggrieved by her dismissal she referred a dispute to the CCMA on 24 January 2022. 
A conciliation meeting was held on 17 February 2022 but the dispute remained unresolved and a certificate to such effect was issued.
The applicant asked that the dispute be resolved through arbitration. 

Issue to be decided 
Whether the applicant’s dismissal was both procedurally and substantively fair and whether the respondent has consistently applied the rules in the workplace.
She sought compensation as relief.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1025

Survey of the evidence and argument

The respondent’s case 
Ms Bernadette Ogilvie testified as follows. She is the team leader responsible for support services, monitoring of the call centre and to ensure that key performance indicators are met. Employees are required to ensure that clients are taken in particular outbound and allocation calls and to ensure that sufficient administration is available. 
The respondent has a rule in place that provides that calls must be returned within 24 hours and that missed client calls are not allowed. Employees are afforded a one-hour break. 
She testified with reference to charge one, that when an agent sits on a call for personal calls it blocks the client’s incoming calls. It was discovered that the applicant (“Lerato”) pretended to be busy on business calls but was busy with private calls. This incident led to the investigation and it was discovered that she sat on calls for about 38 hours which amounted to 43 calls. During this period three other employees were dismissed for a similar transgression and four employees were give written warnings. 
Previously, the employee’s activities could not be traced by the employer but with the introduction of the new system it became possible. They looked at the applicant’s calls in comparison with other employees and discovered that the applicant made continuous calls over longer periods. Her role was to allocate incoming calls. She sat on the calls and not pay attend to the inbound calls [sic]. 
The applicant’s calls were more substantial compared with her colleagues. Her role was not to make personal calls and work related calls must be prioritised. She conceded that she made personal calls when she was confronted. Her calls were between 45 and 60 minutes during breaks. It was communicated to all staff members that personal calls were not allowed. 
She testified in support of the charge related to dishonesty, that the respondent listened to the calls randomly, and discovered she went straight to personal chats. She did not dispute that she made forty-three personal calls. She listened to the recordings that were translated by a member of staff. 
It was established that the applicant made a personal call with a FirstRand client and made derogatory remarks about the employer. She did not dispute the content of the translation. She was required to serve the employer with loyalty and to the best of her ability. The policy on personal calls provides that employees are not allowed to use the internet, social media or send messages or on a private phone while busy with clients. I find her guilty as charged. 
Her version regarding the breach of the Covid-19 policy was that a circular was disseminated to staff members that requires them to screen themselves for Covid-19 to ensure compliance. The applicant did not follow the protocols as required. She only did the screening much later. She herself answered the questionnaire and confirmed the symptoms. She confirmed that she had a sore throat and was coughing. Despite the  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1026
  symptoms, she reported for duty and was sent home. She showed no remorse for her behaviour.
Under cross-examination she testified that she was not familiar with the ethnic language but that she was assisted by a colleague who translated the conversation between the applicant and the client. She confirmed that she had prepared the spreadsheet of the calls that were made and the duration of it. 
It was her testimony that a conversation could easily be distinguished between a personal and a business chat. Her calls were not an isolated incident. A summary of her calls were made between July to September 2021. She argued that the general rule takes precedence over the policy. 
Under re-examination she stated that the Covid -19 policy was very clear and that it prescribes how employees report to the office. She restated that the applicant was sent home because she had shown symptoms. The data on the spreadsheet was randomly selected and other employees were found guilty of a similar offense. The applicant made personal calls between March and June 2021 and none during July and September 2021. 
Rachel Compaan testified as follow. She is the support manager responsible for the support centre and that the applicant was part of her team. Bernadette was the applicant’s direct line manager. An investigation found the applicant’s calls suspicious which led to an audit being conducted. It was discovered that the business calls were kept on hold whilst she had personal chats. 
This behaviour was unacceptable as the clients are people in distress, homicidal and suicidal candidates. All staff must make themselves available at all times and blocked calls are not allowed. She contended that the general rules supersede the Information Technology (IT) policy. 
Regarding the allegation of procedural unfairness, she denied that she had a personal relationship with the chairperson. She does not even have his mobile cell number and he acted independently. 
Under cross-examination she testified that she was aware of the grievances but that does not mean that a fair process was not followed to resolve the dispute. The applicant made thirty-eight hours of personal calls during the three months’ period. She was unaware that the employees made personal calls. 
This prompted the employer to listen to the recordings of the calls. The applicant was aware of the rule as she worked in a call centre environment and took direct calls from clients. Under re-examination she testified that she became aware of the grievance that was anonymous.

The applicant’s case
The applicant testified in support of her case as follows. She worked for the respondent for about six years. The dispute arose during October 2021 when the team lodged an anonymous grievance against Bernadette for fear of victimisation. On 21 November 2021 she was called to a meeting to address the concerns.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1027
The respondent wanted the names of the aggrieved employees but they were reluctant to disclose their names as they feared victimisation. The grievance was escalated to Chantelle (“Director”) who convened smaller group meetings to establish the employees’ grievances. Chantelle concluded that there were deeper issues at stake and recommended counselling for her. 
At the time when the grievance was raised the usage of the telephone was not in dispute. She was asked to complete a questionnaire. She requested to respond in her home language. Her grievance was not resolved and no feedback was given. During that period the issues of the telephone calls emerged. She did not deny that she made calls and that a policy exists that allows them to make private calls and that it would be deducted from their monthly salary. 
During the Covid-19 pandemic, she was selected to work from home given her performance. She fell ill and a medical certificate was issued by her doctor that she was medically fit and she returned to work. She returned to the office and nobody was present upon her arrival. She left and returned the following day. She went to the bathroom and noticed somebody at reception. 
She conducted the Covid-19 screening exercise and returned to her work station. Anita approached her and told her to go home because she answered yes to the questions. She further indicated that she had reported it to Rachel. Her version was that nobody was at risk as she and another employee were the only people at work. She produced a medical certificate and was cleared by her doctor. 
With regard to the charge that she tarnished the image of the company, she has a friend at FirstRand and they share the same tax practitioner. They had a conversation about tax returns when working from home. The company did not allow her to claim from SARS when working from home and she felt it was unreasonable. She denied that she had tarnished the image of the company during their discussion. 
She used the company phone when working from home and was not instructed not to do so. She was called to a disciplinary hearing and was dismissed. She expected that the company would apply progressive disciplinary steps against her. 
Under cross-examination she read the policy into the record of the proceedings that says that employees are not allowed to make private calls or use the internet. She contended that even-though the policy is in place the employees generally had access to the facilities. She disputed that a general rule existed for the usage of the calls and the internet. 
She confirmed that the grievance that was lodged was anonymous and that the company indicated that it could not be resolved if the names of the aggrieved employees were not provided. She attended the mediation session which was arranged by Chantelle and that she did not receive the outcome.
She believes that she was singled out and targeted. She conceded that five other employees were dismissed on similar charges. She conceded that  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1028
  she made private calls and that she was asked not to make the calls. She denied that she had tarnished the name of the company during her conversation with her friend. She should have been given a sanction short of dismissal. Under re-examination she repeated her earlier versions given during examination-in-chief. 
Samone Padotam testified as follows. She confirmed that an anonymous grievance was submitted by the employees to Rachel concerning the behaviour of Bernadette and that small group meetings were held to address the issues. Lerato (applicant) had chosen mediation to resolve her dispute but no outcome was provided. 
She was aware of the telephone policy that provided for private usage and that it would be deducted from the salary. She observed people making private calls all the time. She confirmed that she received an email from Chantelle (Director) informing employees to stop making private calls. 
Under cross-examination she confirmed that the applicant was dismissed for breaching Covid-19 protocols and that she had made personal calls. She agreed that the applicant made personal calls. She was aware that employees were dismissed for breach of the company policy. Bernadette was sent on an anger management course.

Closing arguments 
I acknowledge the closing arguments as submitted by the parties. I will consider the submissions where materially necessary in my assessment of the case. 

Analysis of evidence and argument
I must determine whether the applicant’s dismissal was fair. The applicant contended that her dismissal was both procedurally and substantively unfair. She also contended that the sanction was too harsh and that the respondent acted inconsistently.
The respondent argued that the dismissal was not unfair and that the applicant should not be awarded any relief for her misconduct.
The respondent bears the onus to prove that the applicant is guilty of the allegations on a balance of probabilities. The applicable test when considering the merits of the case related to unfair dismissal is on a balance of probabilities. 
In Govan v Skidmore 1952 (1) SA 732 (N) [also reported at [1952] 1 All SA 54 (N) – Ed], it was held, that in making findings and inferences in a civil case, that the court may go on a mere preponderance of probabilities, even though in doing so, it does not exclude every reasonable doubt, so that one may, by balancing probabilities select a conclusion, which seems to be the more natural, or plausible conclusion from amongst several conceivable ones, even though that conclusion may not be the only reasonable one. 
In considering whether or not the applicant has breached the respondent’s policy and procedures, the following factors must be evaluated namely: 
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1029
 (i) whether there was a rule or standard, and if so whether the rule or standard was contravened; 
whether there was a rule or standard, and if so whether the rule or standard was contravened; 
whether the rule was reasonable;
whether the employee was aware or could reasonably have been expected to have been aware of the rule or standard;
whether the rule or standard has been consistently applied; and 
whether dismissal was an appropriate sanction for the contravention of the rule. 
The first issue to be determined is whether there was a rule or policy in the work place related to personal calls and whether there was a rule that provides for it to be deducted from employees’ monthly salary. The applicant was adamant that she acted within the scope of the existing telephone policy. 
Having listened to the evidence presented by both the applicant’s and the respondent’s witnesses on the issue of the phone call policy, I find that the version of the respondent’s witnesses was more probable than that of the applicant. It appears to me that the applicant was the only witness that harboured the belief that she was entitled to make private calls and that it would be deducted from her monthly salary. 
I find on a balance of probabilities and on the documentary evidence which was corroborated by the respondent’s witnesses and by the applicant’s own witness that a policy was in place. I further find that the respondent had communicated it to staff members that private calls was no longer permissible. In my view the policy was reasonable. Even, if I accept the applicant’s version that such a policy was in place, I find it highly improbable because on summary of the applicant’s calls compared with her other colleagues, her calls were substantial, thirty-eight hours for the period in question. 
In an objective assessment of the time that was spent on the calls it was not only excessive but clearly raised the question of the applicant’s productivity in the execution of her work assignments whilst on duty. Therefore, the applicant’s version is not plausible and it is unlikely that she could not have been aware of it. 
I find the applicant guilty of charges 1 and 2 on the allegations of dereliction of her duties and that she acted dishonestly by pretending to be busy at work whilst conducting personal chats. It stands to reason that an employee cannot claim for work that was not performed. However, I must point out despite the applicant’s denial of the policy, during her evidence-in-chief, she conceded that a policy was in place but then argued that the penalty was too harsh, which I will deal with later. 
The next issue is about the telephone conversation with the friend about the tax claims from SARS and whether the respondent’s image was tarnished during the discussion. It is common cause that the conversation, between the applicant and the client/friend took place. A dispute exists as to whether the translated version on the content of the conversation was factually correct.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1030
The applicant denied that she made unwelcome remarks while the respondent argued their name and brand were tarnished. I had an opportunity to look at the translation that was conducted by Lebogang Tabe of the conversation between the applicant and her client/friend. On my assessment the content shows that the discussion was not commendable or deserving of praise. Some of the remarks made were that the employer was silly and reported them anonymously to SARS for illegal activities. I find that the applicant tarnished the respondent’s name.
The last charge relates to whether the applicant breached the Covid-19 policy. I am satisfied that the respondent has a Covid-19 return to work policy in place. The policy was signed off by the Group Chief Executive Director on 3 May 2020 and communicated to employees. The difficulty I have is that the applicant herself answered the questionnaire and volunteered the information that she had symptoms. She went further and suggested that she was not a risk to anybody. She further argued that she was cleared by her medical doctor after she was sent home. The issue is not whether she was cleared by her doctor but whether she complied with the policy. I find that the applicant contravened the Covid-19 return to work policy. 
Turning to whether the rule was consistently applied. In eThekwini Municipality v Hadebe and others DA17/14 [2016] ZALAC 14 (LAC) and [2016] 8 BLLR 745 (LAC), (handed down on 10 May (2016), the Court confirmed that inconsistent discipline does not affect the validity of the reason for the dismissal. It affects the fairness of the dismissal. In determining the fairness, the question is whether other employees who previously engaged in similar misconduct were treated in the same way. So unless the employer can rationally justify treating one employee differently, it must act consistently. 
In my assessment the respondent had a justifiable reason for treating the other employees differently since the duration of their calls and chats were substantively less compared to the applicant. Notwithstanding that the allegations against the applicant were not related to a single isolated incident. 
The applicant also contended that she became a victim of circumstances when she lodged the grievance and that she was targeted. I had an opportunity to study the grievance. It is common cause that the grievance was a group grievance and unsigned. During the entire process of investigating and requesting the names of the affected individuals the respondent tried to resolve the grievance. It is common practice that a grievance must have a complainant. I am not persuaded by the applicant’s argument that she remained anonymous for the fear of victimisation. In my view the grievance was not a whistle blowing exercise related to a serious crime where a witness protection was required. In my view she disingenuously tried to link the grievance with her disciplinary enquiry. In Fidelity Cash Management Service v CCMA and others (DA10/05) [2007] ZALAC 12, [2008] 3 BLLR 197 (LAC), (2008) 29 ILJ 964 (LAC), (handed down on 5 December 2007), it was held that farness is determined mostly on the  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1031
  basis of the reason for dismissal which the employer had given at the time of the dismissal. 
I am satisfied that the respondent did not act inconsistently. The applicant failed to discharge the onus to prove that the respondent acted inconsistently in the application of rules in the workplace. 
Finally, I must determine what would be an appropriate sanction in the circumstances of this case. The applicant argued the sanction was too harsh and that she expected the respondent to have applied progressive disciplinary measures. 
In the matter of Sidumo and another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and others [2007] 28 ILJ 2405 (CC); [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC), I am required to consider the following factors which are not an exhaustive list namely:
take into account the totality of circumstances; 
consider the importance of the rule that was broken and the impact of the trust relationship;
consider the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal and the employee’s challenge to the dismissal; 
the harm caused by the employee’s conduct;
the impact that it had on the trust relationship; 
whether training and instruction may result in the employee not repeating the misconduct;
the effect of the dismissal on the employee and his or her long service record. 
The respondent’s Disciplinary Code and Procedure provides for termination for dishonesty and provides for progressive disciplinary measures in isolated single incidents of misconduct for the breach of the rule. In the present case the applicant was guilty of the cumulative charges. 
The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, (“the Code”) in item 3(5) provides, when deciding whether or not to impose the penalty of dismissal, the employer should in addition to the gravity of the misconduct consider factors such as the employee’s circumstances (including length of service, previous disciplinary record and personal circumstances) the nature of the job and the circumstances of the infringement itself. 
The LRA and our Courts have endorsed the concept of corrective or progressive discipline and emphasised that the purpose of discipline serves as a means for employees to know and understand what standards are required of them in the workplace. The LRA further advocates that efforts’ should be made to correct employees’ behaviour through a system of progressive disciplinary measures such as counselling and warnings. 
However, the Code also provides guidelines as to what constitutes minor and serious offences. In the present case, the allegations against the applicant fall into the category of serious offences given the cumulative nature of the transgressions. I do not share the contention that the sanction  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1032
  was too harsh, as I am of the view that any lesser sanction would not serve a purpose and must be ruled out given its seriousness. 
The respondent argued that the applicant’s misconduct had broken the trust relationship between them. I accept the respondent’s submission that the trust relationship has been damaged between the applicant and the respondent through her misconduct. In the case of Council for Scientific and Industrial Research v Fijen (1996) 17 ILJ 18 (AD) at paragraph 26 and [1996] 6 BLLR 685 (A) it was held, and it is well established that any relationship between the employee and his employer is one of trust and confidence.
In the LAC judgment in De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd v CCMA and others (2000) 21 ILJ 1051 (LAC) at paragraph 25 [also reported at [2000] 9 BLLR 995 (LAC) – Ed], the Court held that it would be difficult for an employer to re-employ an employee who has shown no remorse. It emphasised that acknowledgement of wrongdoing is the first step towards rehabilitation. It held that in the absence of a re-commitment to the employers’ workplace values, an employee cannot hope to re-establish the trust that she/he had broken.
In the circumstances, it will be difficult for the respondent to restore the employment relationship with a person who has repeatedly refused to acknowledge her wrongdoing. In my view the gravity of the misconduct far outweighs any mitigating circumstances. 
I have also considered the factors cited supra in the Sidumo case. I am not persuaded that additional training, counselling or any of the other relevant factors would serve any purpose because the applicant held a position of trust. The misconduct committed by her was serious and caused the breakdown of the employment relationship. 
The LAC observed in De Beers Consolidated Mines Limited supra, that a dismissal is not an expression of moral outrage, much less is it an act of vengeance, it is, or should be a sensible operational response to risk management in a particular enterprise. It has everything to do with the employer’s operational requirements. 
Regarding procedural fairness, the applicant argued that one of the employees had a direct relationship with the chairperson of the hearing because they are Facebook friends. The witness testified that they became friends way before the disciplinary hearing and that it was a once of conversation and he does not have his contact details. I find that the applicant’s claim of an apprehension of bias was not convincing and insufficient to reach such a conclusion. I find that the respondent followed a procedure that is recognised as procedurally fair. 
On the totality of the circumstances, I find that the respondent proved on a balance of probabilities that there was a fair reason for dismissing the applicant. 
I, accordingly, make the following award. 

Award
The applicant’s dismissal was both procedurally and substantively fair.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1023 (CCMA) at 1033
The applicant’s claim of inconsistent application of workplace discipline is rejected.
The applicant is not entitled to relief in terms of the Labour Relations Act. 
The application before me is dismissed. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document