



Tladi v Maquassi Hills Local Municipality and others [2014] JOL 32262 (LC)
Judgments Online

Division: Johannesburg
Case No: J 2871 / 12
Hearing Date(s): 06 / 12 / 2012
Judgment Date(s): 14 / 12 / 2012
Bench: Molahlehi J


Keywords


Labour law — Unfair labour practice — Interdict — Alternative remedy

Mini Summary


In terms of a rule nisi granted by the Court, the first two respondents were interdicted from appointing the third respondent or from entering into an employment contract with the third respondent. On the return day of the rule nisi the applicant sought to have the order confirmed whilst the third respondent opposed the confirmation of the order. The applicant had been acting in that position until his acting appointment was terminated by the second respondent. Aggrieved by this, he referred an unfair labour practice to the bargaining council. He contended that he stood to suffer prejudice if the first respondent was to be allowed to appoint the second respondent prior to the determination of the unfair labour practice dispute that he has instituted.

Held that in order to succeed, the applicant had to show that he would suffer irreparable harm to his right to a fair labour practice if the relief he was seeking was not granted by this Court; that he was seeking the present relief because he had no other alternative adequate remedy; and that the balance of convenience favoured the confirmation of the rule nisi.

As the appointment of the third respondent had already taken place, the alleged infringement of the right the applicant complained about had already happened. In our law, an interdict cannot be granted when the conduct complained about has already occurred unless the conduct is of a continuing nature or that it is reasonable believe that it will be repeated. Although of the opinion that the application fell to be dismissed on the above ground alone, it went on to conclude that the applicant's case had to fail for reasons that there were adequate alternative remedies, one of which was in the form of a referral of the unfair labour practice dispute to the bargaining council.

The application was dismissed.

 
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 2

MOLAHLEHI J:

Introduction

[1]    On 31 December 2012 the court made a rule nisi in the following terms:

Interdicting and restraining the 1st and 2nd Respondents from appointing the 3rd Respondent, alternatively, from entering into an employment contract with the 3rd Respondent, In the Position As Manager: Strategy Planning, Office Municipal Manager, pending the final determination of the unfair Labour practice dispute, referred to the SALGBC on 30 October 2012."

[2]    On the return day of the rule nisi the applicant sought to have the order confirmed whilst the third respondent on the other hand opposed the confirmation of the order.

[3]    The complaint of the applicant is that the second respondent terminated the appointment as acting manager: strategy manager on 7 May 2012. He contends that the termination of acting appointment was unlawful because of the following reasons:

On 21 December 2011, the respondent appointed the second respondent as municipal manager.
The acting position of the second respondent as municipal manager was declared unlawful as of 21 March 2012, by Gaibie AJ.

[4]    The applicant says he became aware of the above, on 24 July 2012, and thereupon lodged a grievance regarding the unlawful termination of his acting appointment.

[5]    His grievance seemed not to have received a favourable attention and it was for this reason that, he referred an unfair labour practice to the Bargaining Council.

 
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 3

[6]    In the meantime the position in question which he had occupied as an acting manager was advertised in the local newspaper. He applied for the position, was interviewed but was unsuccessful. The successful candidate was the second respondent who was recommended for appointment on 25 October 2012.

[7]    On 29 October 2012, the applicant instructed his attorneys of record to refer an unfair labour practice dispute in terms of section 186(2) of the Labour Relations Act to the South African Local Government Bargaining Council ( the Bargaining Council).

[8]    The applicant contends that he stands to suffer prejudice if the first respondent was to be allowed to appoint the second respondent prior to the determination of the unfair labour practice dispute that he has instituted.

[9]    The applicant further contends that he has good prospects of succeeding with his unfair labour practice dispute for the following reasons:

Procedural flaws in is far as the position was not internally advertised as required by the 1st Respondent's employment policy;
Procedurally flawed insofar as 1st Respondent's Employment Policy was not complied with;
1st and 2nd Respondent's conduct constituting unfair labour practice as contemplated by section 186(2)(a);
The fact that I am the most suitable candidate for the position;
The 3rd Respondent not satisfying the requirements of the position as advertised."

Evaluation

[10]    It is common cause that the applicant has referred an unfair labour practice dispute in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act of 1995 (the  
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 4
LRA)1. In the present proceedings the applicant is thus seeking an order reinstating him into his previous acting position as a manager, pending the outcome of the unfair labour practice dispute.

[11]    In the alternative the applicant is seeking a specific performance order directing the first respondent to reinstate him into the acting position as the manager in the office of the municipal manager.

[12]    The issue for determination in this matter is whether the rule nisi made by this Court on 29 November 2012 should be discharged or confirmed.

[13]    In the context of the facts of this case, in order to succeed the applicant has to show the following:

He will suffer irreparable harm to his right to a fair labour practice if the relief he is seeking is not granted by this Court.
He is seeking the present relief because he has no other alternative adequate remedy.
The balance of convenience favours the confirmation the rule nisi.

[14]    In opposing the application the respondent has raised a number of points in limine, the first being that "the horse has bolted, "in that the appointment of the third respondent has already taken place and that was with effect from 01 November 2012, with the acceptance of the offer by the third respondent on 31 October 2012.

 
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 5

[15]    This means that the alleged infringement of the right the applicant complains about has already taken place. It is trite in our law that in interdict could not be granted when the conduct complained about has already occurred unless the conduct is of a continuing nature or that is reasonable believe that it will be repeated.

[16]    The conclusion of an employment contract, and the consequent appointment is not an ongoing process, but a single event. In my view the applicant's claim stands to fail for this reason alone.

[17]    In my view this matter essentially turns around the consideration of whether the applicant has alternative remedy to address his complaint.

[18]    Mr Schöltz, for the applicant argued that the unfair labour practice proceedings which the applicant has instituted does not provide adequate alternative remedy, because there is a possibility that the Arbitrator may if she or he finds in favour of the applicant order compensation and not reinstatement into the position in which the applicant was acting in before the dispute arose. He did not however dispute that the Arbitrator does have the powers in terms of section 186(2) of the LRA to order that the applicant be promoted to the position in question. The essence of this argument, as I understand it is that the alternative remedy must be equal to the remedy that the applicant had pleaded for in his claim before this Court. In other words the proposition is that the alternative remedy must be equal to the remedy which the court could make.

[19]    I do not agree with the proposition of Mr Schöltz, as in my view the requirement is not that the alternative remedy should be equivalent to that which the court may in the application before it make but rather as, Prest in The Law and Practice of Interdicts2, puts it, the requirement is whether "there is no satisfactory remedy available to the applicant". This is also in line with what is stated by Herbstein and Van Winsen in Civil Practice of the High Court of South Africa (5ed)3, where it is stated that: 
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 6
"The applicant for an interdict must establish that there is no other alternative remedy available. The alternative remedy postulated in this context must –

the adequate in the circumstances;
the ordinary and reasonable;
be a legal remedy;
grant similar protection."

[20]    The above principles were in fact stated by the court in Minister of Law and Order v Committee of the Church Summit 4,as follows:

"Concerning the alternative remedy, the Courts have determined that it must be adequate in the circumstances, be ordinary and reasonable, be a legal remedy and also grant similar protection to a party. . .

Generally and applicant will not obtain an interdict if he can be awarded adequate compensation or amends by way of damages.

The enquiry on this essential is whether an interdict is the only relief or remedy to help the applicant, or is there a satisfactory alternative remedy. Furthermore, the circumstances relating to each case will indicate whether the award of damages (in this instance compensation) is an adequate alternative remedy. The Court maintains discretion. It is a factor in the general discretion of the Court."

[21]    On the facts of this case I find that the rights which the applicant complains have been tampered with by the respondent can be addressed by effectively, and for that matter through the unfair labour proceedings which the applicant has already instituted before the Bargaining Council, in particular when regard is had to the relief sought under that claim being promotion.

[22]    As indicated earlier, Mr Schöltz, argued that there is a possibility that the Arbitrator in considering the unfair labour practice is likely to award only  
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 7
compensation and not promotion. That proposition, in my view, has no merit because of what it does, is simply to prejudge what the Arbitrator is likely to find in his or her determination of the dispute as would be presented by the parties. In any case if the Arbitrator was to fail to apply his/her mind properly in determining the appropriate remedy, the applicant has a remedy in the form of review, including appeal if he is still not satisfied with the outcome of the review.

Costs

[23]    Mr Schöltz submitted that the court should make a costs order as concerning the postponement of the matter the previous week. The only information placed before this Court is that the postponement was due to the failure by the respondent to file its answering affidavit properly.

[24]    In my view the information placed before this Court is insufficient to exercise its discretion properly in terms of section 162 of the Labour Relations Act5.

[25]    The respondent has on the other hand argued that a punitive costs order should be made against the applicant because the applicant was litigating by way of proxy in that he referred the matter to the bargaining council and therefore institutes these proceedings. It was further submitted that a third of the papers in the application were irrelevant and unnecessary for the purposes of determining the matter.

[26]    I agree with the third respondent and also find that this application was unnecessary and the third respondent has been placed under unnecessary inconvenience. I further agree with the third respondent that to make  
[2014] JOL 32262 (LC) at 8
disapproval of the approach adopted by the applicant a punitive costs order should be made.

Conclusion

[27]    In summary, it is clear from the above that the applicant's case stands to fail for reasons that there are adequate alternative remedies, one of which is in the form of a referral of the unfair labour practice dispute to the Bargaining Council.

Order

[28]    In the premises, the following order is made:

The rule nisi made on 29 November 2012 is discharged.
The applicant is to pay the costs of the third respondent on attorney and own client scale


Footnotes
1	  S 186(2) of the LRA reads as follows:
"'unfair Labour practice' means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving-
 (a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
 (b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
 (c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
 (d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.".
2	 The Law and Practice of Interdicts at 45.
3	  Herbstein and Van Winsen in Civil Practice of the High Court of South Africa (5ed) at 1467–1468.
4	 Minister of Law and Order v Committee of the Church Summit 1994 (3) SA 89 (BGD) at 99 [also reported at [1994] 4 All SA 448 (BG) – Ed].
5	 S 162 of the LRA reads as follows:
 "(1) The Labour Court may make an order for the payment of costs, according to the requirements of the law and fairness.
 (2) when deciding whether or not to order the payment of costs, the Labour Court may take into account-
 (a) whether the matter referred to the Court ought to have been referred to arbitration in terms of this Act and, if so, the extra costs incurred in referring the matter to the Court; and
 (b) The conduct of the parties-
 (İ) in proceeding with or defending the matter before the Court; and
 (İİ) during the proceedings before the Court.
 (3) The Labour Court may order costs against a party to the dispute or against any person who represented that in those proceedings before the Court.".

Appearance:
Mr Schöltz, Schöltz Attorneys (At); Advocate BL Makola, GS Dlanjwa Attorneys (R)


End of Document