



National Transport Movement obo Letsoha and others / Bespoke Amenities [2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAJB5224-22
Date: 20/03/2023
Before: M Phala, Commissioner
Keywords


[Paragraph numbering as per Award — Ed.]
Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Dismissal for lodging grievance — Signatories to petition forming basis of grievance dismissed for calling for “removal” of MD — Dismissal unfair.

Editor’s Summary


While a strike led by the applicant union (“NTM”) was underway at premises neighbouring those of the respondent (“Bespoke”), union representatives signed a petition saying that the Bespoke’s MD “must fall” and victimising and harassing them. The 27 applicant employees were dismissed after being found guilty on charges of gross dishonesty and insolence for accusing the company of abuse, sexual harassment, threatening and intimidating employees and falsely alleging that the MD had sexually harassed a shop steward. The respondent contended that it had conducted a grievance hearing into the allegations against the MD, which were found to be without foundation and that the dismissed employees could no longer be trusted. 

On the charge relating to the petition, the Commissioner held that, although disciplinary charges need not be drafted with the precision of criminal indictments, the first charge was embellished and replete with factual inaccuracies. There was no reference to abuse or sexual harassment in the petition. The reference to “harassment” had no sexual connotation. The second charge accused the signatories to the grievance of perjury even though the petition was not a sworn affidavit. The grievance referred to incidents going back about five years and the chairperson had excluded charges of sexual harassment. 

The Commissioner held further that the purpose of grievance proceedings is to improve relations by exposing patterns of behaviour that need to be rectified. The chairperson had encouraged the parties to work together, but Bespoke had pronounced the dispute resolved and prematurely charged the employees. While the subsequent dismissal might not have been automatically unfair, the fact remained that the employees had been dismissed for lodging a grievance, which was not a fair reason for dismissal. 

Turning to relief, the Commissioner noted that reinstatement may not be ordered if the circumstances surrounding a dismissal were such that a continuation  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 688
of the employment relationship would be intolerable. The level of acrimony exhibited in the dispute was palpable that there was no prospect of the employment relationship being continued.

The dismissed employees were each awarded compensation equal to 12 months’ wages.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

1 Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration was held on several days but finalised on 13 March 2023. Mr Ephraim Mphahlele and Mr Lawrence Moabelo, union officials, represented the applicants and Ms Leanie Janse van Rensburg appeared for the respondent. 
The parties submitted written closing statements by agreement 

2 Issue to be decided
Whether the dismissal of the applicants was substantively unfair. 

3 Background to the issue
The applicants referred unfair dismissal disputes at different times and in terms of small groups. The disputes were consolidated by different commissioners and at the time the dispute came before me there were at least 27 applicants under the case number above. All the separate disputes were conciliated and remained unresolved. The applicants requested that the dispute be resolved through arbitration

Preliminary point
At the beginning of the arbitration the applicants raised a preliminary point that the written statements were made under duress or alternatively under undue influence. The parties addressed the forum and I made a comprehensive ruling declaring the statements inadmissible. 
In rendering the award I had regard to the testimonies of Christia Winifred Bafatakis, Todor Yankov, Bruce Charles Turner, Lebogang Pheko, Jerry Nkosinathi Maphosa all witnesses for the respondent and two applicants Maria Maphosa, Kgomotso Khoza. The parties relied on a common bundle of documents that the respondent submitted. 

Survey of the evidence and argument

Respondent’s case
Christia Winifred Bafatakis testified that she was the Human Resource Manager.  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 689
On 10 January 2022 the company reopened after the December holidays and a meeting was held in the factory area between staff and management regarding the condition in which the company was left during the break. 
The Managing Director expressed disappointment that the stock was left on the floor; there was no cleaning; and the factory was left in a bad state. 
The company manufactures hotel amenities, body lotion, soap and shampoo for the hotel industry. 
On 13 January 2022 there was a meeting arranged with the union which was supposed to discuss salaries.
On 19 January 2022 the applicants submitted a petition to the respondent outlining certain concerns they had. The applicant recorded; 

“We the members of National Transport Movement (NTM) employed at Bespoke hereby lodge a petition against the above mentioned manager who is intimidating, harassing, assaulting and thretening workers

We consequently demand the removal of above mention manager from the company as workers live with threat and Fear”. (Sic.) 1 

On 31 January 2022 the applicants filed a formal grievance and the issues were in essence similar to those in the petition. 
Once the respondent received the grievance an external person was appointed to investigate the matter which was done on 27 February 2022. 
Bafatakis returned to the events of 10 January 2022 and stated that the applicants were advised to take extra precautions because of Covid-19. The MD also reminded them that established clients such as Michael Angelo Hotel was closed and the country was still recovering from the Pandemic.
A cell phone was taken from an employee because it was not allowed in the factory area. The briefing continued and eventually the applicants went to their workstations. The phone was handed to her and it was given to the employee when it was claimed. 
Some of the applicants were not present at the briefing such as Zenzo, Jordan, Tintswalo, Elsina Putlane, Kwanele Nkomo. In fact about 7 employees were not present.
The applicants were divided into three groups in preparing for the arbitration. Group 1 were employees who were on leave but some of them signed the petition.2
There were leave forms for all those employees and Zenzo had taken family responsibility leave as there was a bereavement in the family.

Grievance 
The respondent appointed an external person, Ivette Ruud, to facilitate the process. She compiled the minutes.3  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 690
There was no referral to an external forum after the grievance was finalised.
The applicants were called to a disciplinary hearing, found guilty and dismissed. Group 1 were found guilty of the three charges levelled against them.4
The hearing was held on 18 February 2022 and there was no evidence that employees were intimidated.
There were employees who refused to participate in the hearing having made certain allegations against the MD. In response to the question that the employees in Group 1 were asking for reinstatement, Bafatakis stated that the trust relationship has broken down and she would not work with them. 
The applicants in Group 2 were also found guilty of charges 1, 2 and 4.5 
The applicants in group 3 were found guilty of charges 1, 3 and 4 and did not lead evidence in relation to the allegations in the petition. 

Video footage
Employees of a company next door were involved in a strike. Although the applicants could not be identified, the common denominator was NTM. 
Just before lunch a group of employees on strike at the company next door chanted slogans and during lunch joined that group and chanted the same slogans.
Bafatakis testified that a witness for the respondent, Lebogang Pheko, will confirm that the applicants were indeed part of the group and chanted slogans.6 
The following employees were identified, Kgomotso Mogabo, Letta Motshegoa, Petunia Ratabane, Shadrack Sibanda. Jeffrey Thobela, Tintswalo Hlungwane, Frans Letsoha, Kgomotso Khoza, Kwanele Nkomo, Zenzo Gumpo, Thabani Sibanda, Precious Ngase, Jordan Mpofu, Calvin Mbatha.
The employees in group 3 signed the petition, and the grievance despite the fact that they were not at work. They have asked for reinstatement but is not possible to reinstate them considering the allegations they made.
Todor Yankov the factory manager testified that he started on 1 March 2019. On 1 January 2022 Bruce called a meeting in the Factory. He expressed dissatisfaction with the state of the company during the Christmas break. He also complained that there were too many rejects that were dealt with because of the state of the factory. He also complained that the employees were not complying with GMP (Good Manufacturing Practices). 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 691
As he was talking one of the employees was leaning on the table and her phone was showing. Bruce then approached, took out her phone and displayed it to the other employees. He asked if there was anyone else with a phone. A Kgomotso came forward and declared that she was also in possession of a phone.
The meeting ended on that note because employees were not allowed to use a phone in the factory. At some point he received a phone call from a detective that Maria, the employee whose phone Bruce took, had laid a criminal complaint for sexual harassment.
Subsequent to that Maria was charged with dishonesty and suspended. During negotiations for wages with the union, they insisted that charges be withdrawn but that was rejected. There was then a breakdown in the relationship.
Yankov intimated that he knew about the petition and grievance which were essentially the same. There was a grievance hearing and the outcome was that no misconduct was committed. 
Between 27 and 4 February 2022 a polygraph examiner investigated the petition. It was unthinkable that people could lie about something that did not happen. 
On 7 February 2022 there was a strike next door and the employees came to the gate and started chanting that Bruce must fall. The applicants were in the factory and they started chanting and whistling in approval. At lunch the applicants joined the strike and also agreed with what was being said. They were later identified on CCTV.
Bruce Turner testified that he found the company and he was the Managing Director. On 10 January 2022 he held a meeting with staff and management. He was terribly frustrated because he noted that during the December break the factory was left in terrible state. He had to arrange for people to clean it. Some quality issues were also raised. 
As an ISO certified company systems and policies had to be followed as the company came out of Covid-19.
On 13 January 2022 they held a meeting to negotiate wages and finalise the agreement. At that point the company had already made a decision to suspend and charge Maria, a shop steward. The union demanded that the charges should be withdrawn. The respondent refused and the union said they will submit a petition.
Turner was aware of the petition and grievance. There was a grievance hearing and the outcome was that the allegations of the applicants were not true.
In response to the allegation that he sexually harassed Maria, Turner stated that when he addressed the employees she turned her back on him and was leaning against a table and that is when he noticed a cell phone in the back pocket of her Jeans. He then lifted the phone with his two fingers without touching any part of her body. 
The Disciplinary Code and Procedure of the respondent does not make provision for a process regarding a petition.  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 692
On 7 February 2022 he heard a commotion while in the office and he went out and saw people standing at the gate and shouting profanities, like he was a mother*cker, a “p*es”. The employees became restless and soon thereafter he was advised to vacate the premises so that the situation could subside. 
He discovered at a later stage that the people standing at the gate were from a neighbouring company and they had NTM signage. He also noted later that some of their employees were involved and this was picked up on the video footage.
Turner denied all the allegations contained in the petition that he intimidated, harassed, and assaulted the employees.7 
He was present at the grievance hearing and confirmed that the points dealt at the hearing were as recorded in the outcome of the chairperson.8 
The chairperson made a recommendation that no evidence could be found to support the allegations of the applicants. However, there was a complaint to the police regarding sexual harassment of Maria therefore the grievance hearing could not deal with that item.
The parties were further urged to treat each other with respect and the applicants conceded that the factory was left in a bad state as they were under pressure to finalise their tasks. According to the report Turner apologised for using the F-word. 
Lebogang Pheko, a cleaner, testified that between 23 December 2021 and 11 January 2022 she was on leave and only returned to work on 12 January 2022.
On 14 January 2022 she was informed that there was a meeting of the union. Jozi and Khutso informed her. As a member of the union she was told that they had to sign a petition. During the meeting they were indeed asked to sign a petition. As she was about to sign, she decided to read the petition and realised she could not continue because she did not agree with what was stated. She decided to scratch out the “LEB” she had started to write. Kgomotso and Khutso accused her of being a spy at Bespoke.
Lawrence Moabelo, a union official who was present at the meeting called her outside and asked why she decided not to sign. She advised that she was not present on 10 January 2022. Furthermore, she worked with Bruce Turner and she was directly responsible for cleaning his office. She worked in close proximity with Bruce and it was not possible to demand his removal. 
There were no further documents she was asked to sign but another meeting was convened where she was asked to leave by Kgomotso. She called out her name and asked her to vacate the room. When Pheko asked why Kgomotso said lunch was almost over please give us some space and the former left. 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 693
Pheko later went back to the room and informed fellow union members at the meeting that she would tender her resignation because of the incident.
On 7 February 2022 they were asked to join the employees from a neighbouring company who were on strike during lunch. They went and found the employees picketing and singing Bruce must fall. She then detached from the group because she did not understand why they were saying that about Turner.
Some of the employees singing that Bruce must fall were Lebogang, Petunia, Khutso, Tintswalo.
Jerry Nkosinathi Maphosa testified that he was a Factory assistant. He was a member of NTM and also one of the employees who signed the petition. At the time he did not know what it was and only signed because everyone in the union was signing. 
He only discovered the contents of the petition when Lawrence Moabelo came to the company to find out about more signatures.
On 6 February 2022 he was made to understand that there were employees from a neighbouring company who were on strike and he was asked to support them. 
He was also asked to sign the grievance form but he did not sign the document.9
On 7 February 2022 the employees went out for lunch and when they returned some of the applicants were chanting Bruce must fall. Khoza could not remember the names of some of the applicants and resorted to describing them by way of clothing they were wearing at arbitration. He mentioned Shadrack, Senzo, Lerato, Pinky, Precious, France, Jordan and Kelvin.

Applicants’ case
Maria Kwinda a Packer at the time of dismissal, testified that she was a shop-steward in the company. 
On 10 January 2022 there was a meeting arranged where they were informed that the CEO of the company would be addressing them. Bruce Turner indeed addressed them and said employees were listening to Maria instead of listening to him. She was apparently influencing employees into believing that the company has a lot of money whereas the company was falling apart. He then used the F-word and also said it was bullshit.
He further pointed out that the company was left in a bad state during the December holidays. However, he was referring to Maria instead of the employees. He went on and on and at some point came from behind while Maria was folding her hands, put his hands in her pocket and took out her phone. Tshifiwa Nenghovhela’s phone also rang and another person but no action was taken. Her phone was confiscated. 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 694
Kwinda approached Christa, the HR Manager, to complain that Bruce took her phone but the latter said you were complaining about her phone instead of worrying about her job. She said what Bruce did was wrong because she was a woman and he was a man. She was deeply hurt and she went to her workstation.
At some point she spoke to her manager and he said she should speak to Bruce himself but she was no longer comfortable speaking to him. When she knocked off Christa handed the phone back.
Kwinda stated that she was familiar with the cellphone policy which states that one may be in possession of a phone but you may not use it. 
They received the instructions to perform their duties on WhatsApp group chat. 
Kwinda denied the allegation that she sent a message to Maphosa asking him to join the strike. She was suspended on 11 January 2022.
She was deeply hurt that only her phone was taken. She was not happy with Bruce because he used foul language when addressing employees.
Kgomotso Khoza testified she was employed as a supervisor in the packing department.
She was also present at the meeting called on 10 January 2022. They were returning from December holidays. They were informed that Bruce was there to address them. He was visibly angry. He said they were fools and the only thing they knew was to follow Maria who was telling them that they were likely to get an increase without advising that the company was in trouble and that there were problems in the Industry.
He used the F-word several times and he stated that he was prepared to release some of them and continue with those who were prepared to work. As he was addressing them he noted that Maria was leaning against the table and that she had a cell phone. He approached, lifted her T-shirt and took out the phone out of her back pocket. Immediately thereafter her phone beeped as a message was coming through. Bruce had asked if there was anyone else with a phone, then he approached her and she gave him the phone.
Bruce placed the phone on the pallet and did not hand it to Christa immediately. When she approached her she said she did not have it.
Khoza confirmed that she signed the Petition and Grievance. The purpose was to see to it that Bruce did not address them directly, but send managers to do so.
She was aware of a group of people picketing outside the gate but she was not part of the group as she was working in the factory.
According to Khoza she was part of a group of employees who went out of the premises for lunch and the CCTV captured their return. Lunch was normally between 12–1pm.10  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 695
The still picture derived from the video footage depicting a group of employees including Khoza shows the time as 12:53pm.
The chairperson of the grievance hearing recorded that Bruce apologised but Khoza stated that there was no apology to the employees that she was aware of. 
She denied that she joined the strike next door as alleged by Maphosa. 

4 Analysis of evidence and argument
The applicants were charged with. 
Gross Dishonesty: in that on or about 19 January 2022 the company received a petition undersigned by you indicating that staff members have been abused, sexually harassed, threatened and intimidated whereas such statement is untrue. 
Gross dishonesty: lying under oath. After having received a grievance and petition from NTM union on 19 January 2022 concerning alleged sexual harassment by Bruce Turner against Maria and after you deposed to in a written statement to the extent that Mr Turner in fact did not commit any acts of as alleged, you signed a further grievance dated 31 January 2022 making the same allegations of sexual harassment against Mr Turner.
Gross insolence: In that on or about 28 to 1 February 2022 the company received grievances whereas you informed that the Bruce Turner, The Managing Director, is not allowed to speak to you and only managers may address you. 
It is axiomatic that employers are not expected to draft the allegations with the precision of legally trained personnel. However, when the charges themselves are fraught with factual inaccuracies, it remains to be seen whether there is a nexus between the facts presented and the outcome of the disciplinary hearing.
Charge 1 refers to applicants alleging in the Petition that employees were abused, sexually harassed. A cursory look at the Petition reveal that there was no reference to abuse or sexual harassment. 
In fact it would be useful to quote the extract in full: “We the members of National Transport Movement (‘NTM’) employed at Bespoke hereby lordge a petition against the above mentioned manager who is intimidating, harassing, assaulting and thretening workers.

  We consequently demand the removal of above mention manager from the company as workers live with threat and Fear”. (Sic.) 

The extract above is fraught with spelling errors but the words were very clear. The word closer to what the employer included in the charge is “harassment”. However, one may not readily conclude that the use of the word has some sexual connotation. It is a point that the respondent and the chairperson and hopelessly missed. The word abuse is not in the petition and it remains to be seen how the respondent ended up embellishing it.  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 696
Charge 2 refers to the applicants lying under oath and words such as deposed to a written statement. There was no evidence during the arbitration that the applicants deposed to affidavits which were properly commissioned. In paragraph 3.2 above I dealt with written statements that the respondent sought to introduce into evidence and they were found to be inadmissible. 
Following the ruling, the respondent ought to have revised its strategy because the only part that was relevant for the purposes of the arbitration is the part dealing with the submission of a grievance on 31 January 2022 repeating the same allegations of sexual harassment.
I must hasten to say that there were similar allegations in the Petition and grievance but they were not the same as claimed in charge 2.
It is common cause that the applicants submitted a grievance on 31 January 2022, which is quite certain and emphatic. However, to then formulate a charge (Charge 3) alleging that on or about 28 January 2022 to 1 February the company received grievances (in the plural) is clearly misleading. There was a grievance submitted on 31 January 2022.
Following the meeting of 10 January 2022, the applicants submitted a Petition on 19 January 2022 making a number of allegations against Bruce Turner, the Managing Director. The company then engaged the services of a polygraph expert to conduct examinations on the applicants. There was a suggestion during the arbitration that Bruce Turner was also tested. However, when the polygraph examiner took the stand during the hearing of the preliminary point, he did not lead evidence on that aspect.
There were no polygraph examinations conducted on the applicants other than the unorthodox approach the examiner adopted which produced written statements that were declared inadmissible. Therefore, the decision to investigate the alleged victims was botched and produced nothing. 
With regard to the grievance, the recommendation of the chairperson excluded sexual harassment because of a criminal complaint. The chairperson noted that the applicants could not substantiate the other allegations.
The grievance against Turner had the following allegations:
Use of vulgar language
Assault
Sexual harassment 
Intimidation 
Emotional blackmail
Discrimination 
Abuse of power
Breach of contract.
Although the date of submission was 10 January 2022, the applicants complained about the events that go as far back as 2017. 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 697
The respondent charged the applicants following the lodging of a grievance on the basis that they made false allegations.
It would be useful to examine the purpose and the benefits of grievance procedures: 
to mediate workplace disputes which would otherwise escalate if not addressed;
improve relationships between colleagues and employees and managers, as well as workplace engagement;
quickly reveal patterns of disputes or repeated issues in the workplace that employers need to address; and
serve as an important platform for victims of sexual harassment, racism and other forms of discrimination to be heard. 
During the cross-examination of the applicants it was put to them that the grievance was in fact resolved, considering that they did not take the issues beyond the respondent.
I fully agree with the proposition considering the recommendation of the chairperson. There is just one aspect that could not possibly have been resolved which is the sexual harassment aspect which was not dealt in the grievance hearing.
Considering the discipline following after the grievance, the applicants had an option to refer a dispute in terms of section 187(1)(d), automatically unfair dismissal which provides that a dismissal of an employee for having taken action or indicating an intention to do so, against the employer by exercising any right conferred by the LRA constitutes an automatically unfair dismissal. The court accepted that lodging a grievance constitutes an exercise of a right conferred by the LRA and a dismissal as a result was, therefore automatically unfair dismissal.11 
On appeal the Labour Appeal Court found that on the facts, the dismissal of the employee was not in retaliation to the employee lodging a grievance. There was no casual nexus between the employee’s grievance and the subsequent dismissal and, therefore, the court did not need to opine on whether it was then automatically unfair. The reasoning of the Labour Court’s decision was later subjected to judicial scrutiny in De Klerk v Cape Union Mart International (Pty) Ltd.12 In the absence of any contrary finding from the LAC, the Labour Court found that Mackay decision to be sufficiently persuasive so as not to prevent the employee from referring an automatically unfair dismissal. In this regard, Steenkamp J stated;

“I am not persuaded that the purposive interpretation adopted by Mlambo J is clearly wrong. It does seem anomalous that an employee in the position of De Klerk or Mackay should not enjoy special protection. Why would a whistle-blower enjoy special protection in terms of s 187(1)(h) but not an employee who lodges a grievance in terms of her own employers; procedures”. 

 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 698
Thus the position was that, if employees could establish that they were dismissed directly as a result of having raised a grievance, they could approach the Labour Court for relief in terms of section 187 of the LRA.
The Mackay position was rejected 20 years later by the Labour Appeal Court in DBT Technologies (Pty) Ltd v Mariela Garnevska.13 An employee lodged a grievance in terms of a contractually agreed grievance procedure (not one arising from a general workplace policy) alleging that a fellow employee had hit her. After the grievance investigation found that there was no merit in the complaint, the employer instituted a disciplinary process against the employee, of misconduct for making false allegation of assault. The employee was dismissed. She argued that her dismissal was automatically unfair and referred a dispute to the Labour Court. Although the court did not refer to Mackay decision, it accepted that a dismissal in reaction to the lodging of a grievance could be automatically unfair.
On appeal the LAC rejected the Mackay position. This is evident from the following excepts from the decision;

“The reasoning of the Labour Court in Mackay is, with respect, misdirected. There is no need to read into the language of section 187(1)(d) of the LRA an additional species of automatically unfair dismissal to give effect to the constitutional right to fair labour practices or to advance effective dispute resolution. Section 188 read with section 191(5)(a) of the LRA amply protects the rights of an employee who is dismissed for lodging a grievance under a private agreement and provides for effective dispute resolution by means of arbitration (my emphasis). The constitutional right to fair labour practices in section 23(1) of the Constitution is given effect to by the LRA. Section 187(1) of the LRA explicitly carves out particular kinds of egregious employer conduct for adjudication exclusively by the Labour Court with additional remedial powers to grant increased compensation. There is no legal basis to extend the scope of section 187(1) of the LRA by adding additional kinds of employer conduct not contemplated by the legislature when enacting the LRA, especially where it has provided adequate redress elsewhere.”

The DBT decision fits perfectly the facts of this current case before me. I indicated earlier in paragraph 4.19 that the applicants could have proceeded in terms of section 187(1)(d). However, the case confirmed that a dispute of this nature can be arbitrated as sections 188 and 191(5)(a) affords sufficient protection to the employee.
It is readily apparent from the charges that the applicants were disciplined and dismissed for lodging a petition and later a grievance. The chairperson’s recommendation encouraged the parties to work together and show mutual respect. The respondent proposed to the applicants that the grievance was resolved. An outstanding issue of sexual harassment was not dealt with but the respondent insisted on charging the applicants in a very misguided manner because the grievance specified an individual who was making that allegation not all staff members.  
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 699
It is, therefore, my finding that the respondent failed to lead sufficient evidence to show that the dismissal of the applicants was substantively unfair. The applicants prayed for reinstatement but the evidence led suggested that the continuation an employment relationship may not be feasible.
The Labour Court or the arbitrator must require the employer to reinstate or re-employ the employee unless:
the employee does not wish to be reinstated or re-employed;
the circumstances surrounding the dismissal are such that a continued employment relationship would be intolerable.
The level of acrimony was palpable in this dispute and it is ill advised to grant the primary remedy. The alternative remedy of compensation is appropriate.
Evidence was presented that the following employees were no longer interested in pursuing their disputes, Danny Thole, Thabang Mogano, Joyce Khoza, Jeffrey Thobela, Khutso Bonoko. 

  I, therefore, make the following award.

Award
The respondent Bespoke Amenities is ordered to pay the following applicant’s 12 months’ compensation calculated in the following manner:

  Amon Nkomo: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Fridda Mametja: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Lesedi Tshabalala: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Maatla Makgoba: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Mokgadi Makgoba: R3 797,50 x 12 = R45 570

  Sylvia Makgeru: R4 238,25 x 12 = R50 859

  Kgomotso Magoba: R3 797 x 12 = R45 564

  Letta Motshegoa: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Petunia Ratabane: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Pinky Khoza: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Shadrack Sibanda: R3 797 x 12 = R45 564

  Kgomotso Khoza: R5 250 x 12 = R63 000

  France Letsoha: R3 806 x 12 = R45 672

  Sabelo Ncube: R5 859 x 12 = R70 308

  Elsina Putlane: R3 955,73 x 12 = R47 468,76

  Tintswalo Hlungwane: R3 955,73 x 12 = R47 468,76

  Kwanele Nkomo: R4 917,88 x 1 2 = R59 014,56

  Senzo Gumpo: R4 917,88 x 12 = R59 014,56 

  Thabani Sibanda: R5 859 x 12 = R70 308

  Precious Ngase: R4 238,28 x 12 = R50 859,36 
[2023] 6 BALR 687 (CCMA) at 700
  Calvin Mbatha: R3 876,62 x 12 = R45 519,44

  Jordan Mpofu: R5 250 x 12 = R63 000

The amounts above are to be paid on 25 April 2023. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	  Annexure 5 p 2 of the bundle. 
2	  Annexure 1 pp 21–27.
3	  Annexure 5 p 165. 
4	  Annexure 1 p 16 of the bundle. 
5	  Annexure 1 pp 51–73 of the bundle.
6	  Annexure 3 p 57 of the bundle.
7	  Annexure 5 pp 2–9 of the bundle.
8	  Annexure 5 p 13.
9	  Annexure 5 p 10 of the bundle. 
10	  Annexure 5 p 133 of the bundle.
11	 Mackay v ABSA Group and another (487/98) [1999] ZALC 116 (28 July 1999) [reported at [1999] 12 BLLR 1317 (LC) – Ed].
12	  (C620/2011) [2012] ZALCCT 22; (2012) 33 ILJ 2887 (LC) (12 June 2012).
13	  (JA61/2018) [2020] ZALAC 26 (LAC) (18 May 2020) (“DBT”) [reported at [2020] 9 BLLR 881 (LAC) – Ed.]


End of Document