



Mdawini and another / Mearns Farming (Pty) Ltd t/a Sherwood Farm [2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: KNPM231-21
Date: 01/04/2024
Before: G Jenkin, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Proof of — Employer relying solely on severance agreement to justify dismissing employees who had failed polygraph tests — Dismissal unfair.
Dismissal — Proof of — Employer relying solely on severance agreement to justify employees who had failed polygraph tests — Dismissal proved.

Editor’s Summary


The applicants, respectively a domestic and farm worker who lived on the respondent’s farm with two children, were identified by a whistle blower (since deceased) for having planned a robbery at a neighbouring farm. Several of the respondent’s workers were requested to undergo polygraph tests, which only the applicants failed. The parties then signed a separation agreement in which it was agreed that the two would leave the farm and that the respondent would pay the rent of a flat for them in a nearby town for three months, which arrangement was cancelled when the applicants referred a dispute to the CCMA, claiming that they had been forced to sign the separation agreement and denying that they had anything to do with the robbery.

The Commissioner noted that it is settled law that severance agreements are valid and enforceable if concluded freely and voluntarily and that parties should not be lightly released from them. The results of the lie detector tests which had aroused the farm owner’s suspicions were supported by the probabilities and his fears were understandable. However, after receiving advice that polygraph test results were not in themselves sufficient to justify a dismissal for misconduct, the respondent had decided to invoke section 189 of the LRA. The statement to the applicants that they could be retrenched them was deceptive and calculated to mislead unschooled people. The process leading to the conclusion of the agreement was rushed, botched and based on a misrepresentation. This was, accordingly, a case in which the applicants should be released from the severance agreements.

The Commissioner held further that because the respondent had relied only on the separation agreement to justify the dismissal, the applicant’s denial that they were involved in the robbery had gone unchallenged and that they had been dismissed for a reason not recognised by the LRA. However, because of the  
[2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA) at 639
close relationship between domestic workers and their employers and the genuine concerns of farmers for their safety, reinstatement would not be appropriate.

Each applicant was awarded compensation equal to 22 days’ wages.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award 

Details of the hearing and the representation
In this case Florancia Mdawini and her son Sinethemba Hopewell Dladla (aka Brian) (“applicants”) alleged that they were unfairly dismissed by Mearns Farming (Pty) Ltd t/a Sherwood Farm (“respondent”) on 8 February 2021. The arbitration ran over five days, interspersed with a number of postponements, and was concluded on 12 March 2024. Written argument was submitted by both parties on 19 March 2024. Applicants were represented by Mr Marcus Bekani Gumede, attorney of MB Gumede & Associates. Respondent was initially represented by Mr Gijimani Samson Sibeko and later replaced by Ms Ureesha Premduth, attorney of Tatham Wilkes Incorporated.
The following witnesses gave evidence for the respondent:
Gijimani Samson Sibeko
Simon Miller – Manager and part owner of respondent
The following witnesses gave evidence for the applicant party:
Florancia Mdawini
Sinethemba Dladla

Issues to be decided
Were the applicants dismissed by the respondent and if so, were their dismissals fair? In the event that applicants are found to have been unfairly dismissed, what is the appropriate remedy?

Background
It is common cause, alternatively it was undisputed that:
Respondent is a working dairy farm, trading as Sherwood Farm, located near Mooi River, KZN.
Applicants were employed by respondent on the Farm. Florancia Mdawini as a domestic worker in the home of Simon Miller, Manager and part-owner of the enterprise. Sinethemba Dladla, the son of Mdawini, as a general farm worker.
Respondent purchased Sherwood farm from Neville Karg in 2019. Mdawini was employed by the Kargs in or about 2010 and was then employed by respondent from April 2019, post purchase. Dladla was employed by respondent on 18 February 2019. He had worked briefly (a month or two) for Karg prior to his employment 

by respondent. Both applicants and two other children of Mdawini lived on the Farm in the same house, provided by respondent.

On or about 12 January 2021 an armed robbery took place on a neighbouring farm (Sandstone Farm), during which the owners of Sandstone as well as a number of employees, were held captive and robbed. The Police investigated the robbery as did two private security companies and a private investigator, engaged by the owner of Sandstone. An informer (now deceased) contacted the owner of Sandstone and told him that he (informer) had reason to believe that Mdawini was involved in the planning of the robbery, as did other informants.
The owner of Sandstone asked Miller if he could subject Mdawini to a lie detector test, amongst other Sandstone employees. The test was conducted at Sandstone Farm on 19 January 2021. In answer to the questions: “Did you plan with anyone to rob Sandstone last Tuesday? Did you give anyone information on how they could rob Sandstone last Tuesday? and Do you know the names of any people who robbed Sandstone last Tuesday?”, Mdawini’s denials were assessed as “Deception indicated”.
Miller then subjected Mdawini to a second lie detector test on 1 February 2021. Dladla and other Sherwood employees were also subjected to the test at this time. Mdawini’s result again showed “Deception indicated”, unlike Dladla and others whose results showed “No deception indicated”.
Miller then sought advice from Sibeko as to how respondent and Mdawini could part company as, in his mind, the test results had led to a breakdown of trust between him, his wife and Mdawini – given the close working relationship between them and the fact that Mdawini had access to the security system of their family home.

“Parties agrees on the settlement agreement that due to the trust relationship that is broken and unrepairable the only way to resolve this problem. The employer will assist the place to stay for the employees. The employer will also agree to look for the place to stay. The following must be paid to the employees as required by law. 1. Notice pay 2. Severance pay. 3. UIF. 4. Outstanding leave days. This agreement binds the parties.” [Sic.]

Miller joined the meeting after the Agreement was written. He and Mdawini signed both versions. A signature purporting to be that of Dladla also appears on both the isiZulu and English versions of the agreement but he denied having signed any document. 
[2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA) at 641
Miller assisted the applicants and Mdawini’s other children to find accommodation in Mooi River and to move their belongings to a flat he rented for them to live in for 3 months, at a cost of R3 600 per month. Miller offered to find Dladla a job, but stopped looking when applicants referred this dispute to the CCMA.
The following payments were included in the total amounts paid to applicants by respondent on termination – as appears on their final payslips: 
Mdawini:

  Days worked: 22.2 x R180 = R3 996

  Leave due: 18 paid days x R180 = R3 240

  Retrenchment: R2 069.61

  Extra: R1 685.77

Dladla:

  Days worked: 22.5 x R180 = R4 050

  Leave due: 20 days paid x R180 = R3 600

  Retrenchment R2 450

Applicants referred this dispute to the CCMA on 16 February 2021.
The main contentions of the respondent were that:
First applicant (Mdawini) voluntarily submitted herself to polygraph examinations having, read, completed and signed consent forms. Further, clause 13 of the first applicant’s employment contract made provision for and gave consent for such examination to be conducted. On both occasions, a significant level of deception was found in the first applicant, which led to a breakdown of trust in the relationship between first applicant and respondent and resulted in the parties concluding a Mutual Separation Agreement. With robberies and farm attacks becoming increasingly common in the surrounding areas and respondent having a young family with a newborn at the time, it made sense to eliminate any possible threat of harm or danger.
After having reached the terms of the Agreement, second applicant proceeded to draft the aforesaid Agreement in isiZulu. An English version was also prepared, however respondent found it prudent for the Agreement to be prepared in the language of the applicants so that it would be better understood. The agreement was signed and witnessed by the parties on 8 February 2021. Over and above paying the applicants the money, due in terms of the Agreement, respondent acted in good faith and found alternate accommodation for applicants and further paid their three months rental.
First applicant alleges that she was forced to undergo polygraph testing. This is inconsistent with her conduct as she signed consent forms and in fact voluntarily submitted herself to such examinations. Further, her conduct was in accordance with 13D of her 

employment contract. The statements made by the applicants regarding the polygraph examinations are inconsistent with the findings in the polygraph reports.

Where parties reach a point where their relationship has broken down for one reason or the other, they may decide to either have a messy divorce or an amicable separation. Where parties decide to separate amicably, they may negotiate the relevant terms of separation. Once consensus is reached they sign a binding mutual separation agreement, eliminating the need for protracted dismissal processes and ensuring finality. As a safeguard, when entering into the Mutual Separation Agreement, respondent ensured that the contents and implications of the Agreement were clearly communicated to the applicants. Due to the language barrier, respondent engaged Sibeko to ensure that all communication was done in the language of the applicants so that there would be no misunderstanding between the parties.
A mutual separation agreement is a settlement agreement undertaken by an employee and an employer and acts as a “full and final settlement” of the legal obligations between the employer and employee. It is neither a resignation nor dismissal and often finds itself in the realm of contract law. It does not require the approach followed in dismissals, that being that it must be substantively and procedurally fair.
Respondent cited the following judgments in support of its contention that mutual separation agreements are valid in law and result in the CCMA lacking jurisdiction to entertain the dispute, as employees party to such agreements are not dismissed but that their employment ends by mutual agreement: Schroeder and another v Pharmacare Ltd t/a Aspen Pharmacare [2015] 2 BLLR 168 (LC); Cook4Life CC v Commission of Conciliation Mediation and Arbitration and others (JR350/2012) [2013] ZALCJHB 10 [also reported at [2014] JOL 32495 (LC) – Ed]; Gbenga-Oluwatoye v Reckitt Benckiser South Africa (Pty) Limited and another (2016) 37 ILJ 2723 (CC) [also reported at [2017] 1 BLLR 1 (CC) – Ed].
Applicants allege that they were merely acting on the basis of instruction from Sibeko in concluding the Agreement and did so under duress. It is the applicants who bear the onus of proving that they signed the Agreement as a result of duress, undue influence and misinterpretation. Throughout the proceedings, applicants failed to discharge the onus of proving that the Agreement was signed under duress. Any contention by the applicants that they did not understand or were coerced into concluding the Agreement, in the absence of any evidence to support this, must in our submission fail.
Even if we assume the applicants did not understand the contents of the Agreement, the maxim, caveat subscriptor, determines that a person who signs a contract is presumed to have assented to the 

terms of the Agreement, regardless of whether or not the signer is familiar with the contents, or carefully peruses or understands the provisions of the contract (Afrox Healthcare BPK v Strydom 2002 (6) SA 21 SCA) [also reported at [2002] 4 All SA 125 (SCA) – Ed]. It is clear from the conduct of the applicants that after receiving their pay-outs and moving out of the respondent’s property, they were fully aware of and understood the Agreement. The applicants defence against the above maxim, was to attack the authenticity of the signature on the Agreement by claiming a forgery of second applicant’s signature, which onus they failed to discharge. Neither applicant ever disputed nor raised any objection to the conclusion of the Agreement.

We submit that the above evidence shows that there were no unfair dismissals as a mutual separation agreement was concluded by the parties. Once that is accepted, then when the Commissioner takes into account the Agreement, it becomes trite that the applicants were not “dismissed” but that their employment ended by mutual agreement. The incident which gave rise to the breakdown of the relationship between the parties, accordingly, plays no role in the validity of the agreement. We respectfully submit that based on the principles of law, in conjunction with the evidence led, the Agreement is valid and binding between the parties and such agreements are settled by the Constitutional Court as not being against public policy (contra bonos mores) and are accordingly lawful.
If it is accepted that there was no unfair dismissal as a result of the Agreement, then the Commissioner should find that the CCMA lacks the necessary jurisdiction to entertain the dispute, because of the existence of the Agreement, dismiss the applicants claim for re-instatement and direct the applicants to pay the costs of the arbitration, jointly and severally.
Both applicants submitted brief closing arguments. Their representative also submitted closing argument, which in essence is a summary of the evidence presented by each witness, with limited comment. I have attempted to extract the elements of argument from these submissions, as follows:
Sibeko could not dispute that respondent did not follow procedures prescribed by law as regards termination of employment. He admitted that Dladla had done nothing wrong. He alleged that the Settlement Agreement was written by Dladla on his own and had advised them not to sign the Agreement if it was not what they wanted. He could not give an answer when asked why he would have advised applicants not to sign the Agreement if it was prepared by them on their own.
Miller said that several informants had indicated that Mdawini was involved in the planning of the robbery and that this led to a breakdown of trust between his family and Mdawini. He alleged that Sibeko came to a settlement with both applicants and they were 

paid out. He admitted that Dladla never did anything wrong. He admitted that both applicants were good employees. Mdawini got along with his wife and Dladla was also a good employee. He conceded that there was no specific evidence that connected Mdawini to the robbery but considered the polygraph test as actual evidence. He could not confirm that Dladla had decided to leave on his own because he wanted to follow his mother, as he was not present when this was allegedly discussed by Sibeko and Dladla. He did however say that he was worried by the fact that Dladla is Mdawini’s son. He agreed that the Settlement Agreement was dictated (to Dladla) by Sibeko.

Mdawini denied any involvement in the robbery on the neighbour’s farm and said that she did not consent to the polygraph test. She signed the Agreement under duress. Sibeko threatened if they did not sign they would not receive any money or assistance with relocation. Sibeko had introduced himself as a labour lawyer from the Department of Labour. She needs the Commissioner to reinstate her so that she can support her children.
Dladla said that the reason for his termination was because he is the son of Mdawini. There was no transgressing on his part. Sibeko had told them that he wanted to concentrate on the package rather than the polygraph test results. Sibeko also said that as Mdawini had failed the test she is no longer needed on the Farm. He wrote the agreement as it was dictated by Sibeko. He denied that he left of his own accord but had gone to work the next day and was chased out by Miller. He has tried to look for a job but it did not last because Miller badmouthed him to a potential employer. He did not sign the agreement. They went to the Department of Labour with the settlement agreement and were advised to approach the CCMA.
A transcript of audio evidence was handed in. It is submitted that both applicants were ambushed by Miller and Sibeko when the termination news of their employment was broached to them. It is clear that respondent broke every possible rule insofar as the procedure for termination of employment is concerned. Applicants were not given an opportunity to state their case – their rights were simply trampled on by respondent and there was a flagrant violation of the employment law on termination.
It is accordingly submitted that, in the circumstances, the termination of their employment was both substantively and procedurally unfair and that retrospective reinstatement is the correct result.

Analysis
It is now established law that mutual separation agreements are valid and enforceable and that parties that settle an existing dispute in full and final settlement should not be lightly released from agreed undertakings, seriously and willingly embraced. See Gbenga-Oluwatoye v Reckitt Benckiser South Africa (Pty) Limited and another (2016) 37 ILJ 2723 (CC) [also reported at [2017] 1 BLLR 1 (CC) – Ed]. The question is, where the  
[2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA) at 645
  terms of the Settlement Agreement concluded by the parties on 8 February 2021 seriously and willingly embraced by the parties? I say “no” for the following reasons:
From the evidence it is clear that, prior to 8 February 2021, Miller had decided that he could not continue to employ Mdawini on the strength of a strong suspicion he held that she was involved in the robbery that took place on his neighbour’s farm. This suspicion arose from the lie detector test outcomes and information from informants. Miller was understandably concerned about the safety of his family, given that Mdawini was employed in the inner sanctum of his family home and had access to the security system.
During the hour long discussion between Miller and Sibeko on 8 February 2021, prior to Sibeko meeting with the applicants, it can safely be assumed that Sibeko advised Miller that the way to “resolve” the issue was to enter into discussions with the applicants about the terms of a mutually agreed separation, as it is common cause that this was the subject of the discussion between Sibeko and applicants immediately thereafter. In my view, it can also be safely assumed that the reason for this advice was that there was insufficient evidence or circumstances upon which to found a dismissal on grounds of misconduct, incapacity or operational reasons. It is now established law that the results of a lie detector test, on its own, cannot be used to establish guilt of misconduct.
So far so good. Miller was not present during the mutual separation discussion that took place between Sibeko and applicants. He joined the meeting after the Agreement had been concluded and was ready to be signed. While the versions of the applicants and Sibeko differed significantly as to what was said during their discussion, in my view the case made out by the respondent is fatally flawed for the following reasons, and despite the fact that it was not raised in argument by applicant’s representative, it cannot be ignored.
Sibeko stated in his evidence, amongst other things, that “The employer did not accuse Florancia (Mdawini) but because of the test results they could not stay on the Farm” . . . “obviously I explained to you (applicants) what the law says you must get in this process.” When asked what the law says, Sibeko’s response was “severance pay, UIF, notice and leave”. This is clearly a misrepresentation of what the law says. There is no law dealing with payment and other terms parties might agree in mutual separation discussions/agreements, save for those prescribed in the BCEA/applicable Sectoral Determination eg leave and notice pay. Severance/retrenchment pay, while provided for in the BCEA, is only applicable in the case of dismissals for operational reasons, as defined. The termination of applicants’ employment was not a retrenchment, the provisions of section 41 of the BCEA do not apply and by  
[2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA) at 646
  telling the applicants that they do was a serious misrepresentation in my view. The terms of parting ways in mutual separation negotiations between an employer and employee, outside certain payments on termination as prescribed in law, should be open ended and agreed by the parties in good faith negotiations, without false limitations being communicated to the employee/s concerned, during the process. This is particularly so when employees, approached by an employer to conclude mutual separation agreements, are unsophisticated, unschooled in labour law, are unrepresented, are not given the opportunity to seek advice on the terms before committing to them and are vulnerable workers like the applicants. In my view the caveat subscriptor rule does not apply and as a consequence, the so called Settlement Agreement reached with applicants is unenforceable. 
No evidence was presented by the respondent to show that applicants were given the opportunity to seek advice on the terms of the Agreement before signing it. In my view, the process of arriving at the Agreement was rushed, botched and based on misrepresentation, with an element of coercion.
The evidence of both applicants is that they were told by Sibeko that if they don’t sign (there and then) they would not receive any money. While Sibeko denied their contention, I prefer applicants’ version as they corroborated one another’s versions and Sibeko’s credibility as a witness was compromised by his assertion that Dladla penned the Agreement on his own, but was contradicted by Miller, who conceded under cross-examination that the Agreement was dictated to Dladla by Sibeko.
Having found that the Agreement is unenforceable, I must conclude that applicants were dismissed, as their employment contracts were not terminated for misconduct, incapacity or operational reasons.
Was the dismissal of the applicants unfair? I find that it was because no recognised fair procedure was followed and no fair reason was advanced or proven for their termination of their employment contracts.
Dladla raised the defence that he had done nothing wrong (undisputed) and that he was told by Sibeko that his employment was being terminated because he is related to Mdawini. This was corroborated by Mdawini. The evidence of Sibeko and Miller was that Dladla had said that he could not stay on the Farm if his mother left, implying that he could have chosen to remain in employment. I prefer applicants’ version as Miller, by his own admission, was not present during the discussions making his evidence hearsay and Sibeko’s evidence was that: “The employer did not accuse Florancia (Mdawini) but because of the test results they could not stay on the Farm”. Consequently I find that like Mdawini, Dladla was also dismissed. 
[2024] 6 BALR 638 (CCMA) at 647
As to the remedy: given the unusual circumstances surrounding the dismissals, the close relationship that exists between domestic workers and their employers, living arrangements on farms and genuine concerns that farmers have about the safety of themselves and their families, I will not order reinstatement, but will order compensation, taking into consideration moneys already paid to the applicants, according to their final payslips. The money paid to the applicants on termination of services on 8 February 2021 was R11 997 to Mdawini and R10 576.53 to Dladla, which included a full month’s pay for the month of February 2021, leave pay and an amount referred to as “retrenchment.” Notice pay is effectively included in these payments. The amounts were based on a rate of R180.00 per day, which was above the legislated minimum daily rate for farmworkers at that time. In addition, applicants were accommodated in a flat in Mooi River for a period of 3 months at respondent’s expense (R3 600/month) and were assisted, at no cost, to transport their belongings to the flat. In my view, given the circumstances surrounding the dismissals, the applicants’ length of service with respondent (approximately 2 years), fair and equitable compensation, in addition to payments already made, would be a further 3 months wages each, based on a rate of R180/day. This amounts to R11 880 each. The method used to calculate this amount is: R180/day x 22 days x 3 months.
Whether Mdawini was paid severance pay by the Kargs when they sold the Farm to respondent or whether respondent took over the Karg’s farming business as a going concern, at the time of purchase, was not raised by either party or determined during this arbitration.

Award
The termination of the applicants’ employment contracts, by respondent, is found to constitute unfair dismissal. Respondent, Mearns Farming (Pty) Ltd, is ordered to pay applicants, Florancia Mdawini and Sinethemba Dladla the sum of R11 880 each on or before 15 April 2024. Payment of the above amounts must be made directly into their banking accounts by due date. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document