



SAMWU obo Xulu / Ethekwini Municiplity: Parks, Recreation & Culture Unit [2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban
Case No: EMD101 008
Hearing Date(s): 16 & 21 / 2 / 2011
Award Date(s): 18 / 03 / 2011
Before: S Samuel


Keywords


Labour Law — Misconduct — Disobedience — Fair rule — Media — Communicating with — Misconduct not warranting dismissal

Mini Summary


The applicant challenged his dismissal as acting pool supervisor for having, defied instructions by making reports to the media (Sowetan newspaper) without seeking permission. The applicant advised the media that his services had been terminated, and released his letter of termination together with the charge sheet to the media. The charge related only to communications made to the media after he had been warned at a meeting that contacting the media without permission was a dismissible offence.

Held that the onus was on the respondent to prove that there was a common understanding about the rule and that it had existed for some time. The city manager’s circular that set out the rule supported its submissions, as did the respondent’s communications policy. In any event, certain rules applied to all employment relationships – some rules were so well established that it was not necessary to communicate them. There was a standard of ethical behaviour about which employees did not need to be reminded and it was of no consequence that the misconduct was not specifically described in a code or agreement. However, if a rule was arbitrary or not linked to a commercial rationale, it could be invalid. The applicant had been provided with sufficient information to acquire an appropriate understanding of the respondent’s rules. There were sufficient procedures in place for the applicant to have acquainted himself with the rule and his duty in that regard.

The applicant’s claim that the journalist misrepresented the direct quote he gave was fabricated, simply to exonerate himself. The applicant contacted the media and divulged privileged information because he was upset at having to revert to being a pool attendant after his contract as an acting pool supervisor was terminated.

It was necessary to strike a balance between an employee’s right to free speech in the workplace and the respondent’s right to its reputation. In this regard, there was no evidence to support the respondent’s case that the misconduct was so serious to justify dismissal. In the circumstances the dismissal was not fair.

While the evidence the misconduct did not warrant dismissal, it did deserve a penalty. The applicant repeated his misconduct knowing that he was subject to disciplinary proceedings. He thus shut the door on his opportunity to convey good faith on his part. Accordingly it was just and equitable that the reinstatement be retrospective for a period of five months only and a final written warning be issued against the applicant.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 2




Details of the hearing and representation

[1]    The arbitration was held first in the boardroom at Botanic Gardens on 16 February 2011 and then at the offices of the SALGBC at 461 Dinuzulu Road South in Durban on 21 February 2011.

[2]    The applicant was represented by Mr Papane of Samwu and the respondent by its human resources manager – Mr Ngcobo. The applicant and respondent submitted their respective bundles of documents. The applicant disputed the collective agreement on divisional conditions of service as submitted by the respondent. The rest of the bundle was admitted as evidence for this arbitration. The respondent and applicant filed their written closing arguments on 1 March 2011 and 14 March 2011 respectively.

Issue to be decided

[3]    Whether the applicant's dismissal was substantively unfair.

Background to the dispute

[4]    The applicant is Dumisani Xulu. He was employed by the respondent as a pool attendant. Whilst holding this substantive post of pool attendant he was also contracted to the respondent as an acting pool supervisor for several years.

[5]    The applicant was charged as follows:

"You failed to Conduct yourself because you did not obey reasonable instructions given to you by your authorities when you allegedly made reports to the media (Sowetan Newspaper) dated 17/12/09 and 10/02/10 respectively without seeking prior permission from your supervisors and

You failed to Conduct yourself in that you did not refrain from disclosing privileged information when you allegedly made reports to the media (Sowetan Newspaper) 17/12/09 and 10/02/10 respectively without seeking prior permission from your supervisors."

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 3

[6]    He was dismissed on 29 June 2010 following a disciplinary hearing and lodged a dispute challenging the fairness of his dismissal.

[7]    A certificate of non-resolution was issued on 8 December 2010 in terms of section 135(5) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the act”). The case was then set down for arbitration.

Survey of evidence and argument

Respondent's evidence and argument

[8]    The applicant with the other similarly affected acting pool supervisors was advised on 9 December 2009 that their contracts as acting pool supervisors were terminated with effect from February 2010. In December 2009, February 2010 and later in March 2010, the applicant advised the media of his termination, and released his letter of termination together with the charge sheet to the media. He did so knowing it was against the communications policy, the circular issued by the city manager prohibiting employees from communicating with the media and also the collective agreement dealing specifically with this aspect.

[9]    At a meeting on 26 February 2010 the respondent warned the applicant that contacting the media without permission was a dismissible offence and action would be taken against him for it. No disciplinary action was taken against him for the first two articles published in December 2009 and February 2010. In view of the warning of 26 February 2010 not to breach the rule prohibiting unauthorised media communication, the respondent instituted disciplinary action after the third article published on 11 March 2010 which led to the applicant's dismissal.

[10]    The respondent disputed that applicant was not aware of the rule because the collective agreement was workshopped with employees. There was a disciplinary code which was easily obtainable from the human resources or supervisor. Further that the applicant as an acting pool supervisor for several years would have had to inform his subordinates about the agreement.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 4

Furthermore the meeting of 26 February 2010 issued special instructions prohibiting the conduct.

[11]    Jabulani Rome Mdinisu (Mdinisu) testified to the meeting of December 2009 which notified the acting pool supervisors including the applicant of the termination of their acting appointments with effect from the end of December 2009. He denied advising them to seek assistance or telling them to go anywhere for help. They asked no questions but were understandably angry at this notice of termination. He clarified that the effect of this notice was that the applicant would revert to being a pool attendant.

[12]    Michael Chizzari (“Chizzari”) testified that he prosecuted the applicant at his disciplinary hearing. The applicant pleaded not guilty. He relied on the newspaper articles, city manager's circular and clause 22 of the collective agreement to prove the applicant's misconduct. No employee of the respondent was allowed to contact or release privileged information to the media unless authorised by the city manager or a supervisor. He applied for the sanction of dismissal because the applicant had committed serious misconduct.

[13]    The applicant had knowledge of this rule because of the respondent's practices that ensure knowledge of such rules. The collective agreement is made available to all employees upon commencing employment with the respondent, it is also circulated by management and the applicant's union also workshopped it with its members as per the custom.

[14]    Under cross-examination he maintained that to the best of his knowledge the collective agreement was binding. He did not rely on any legislative acts to prove his case. He confirmed his evidence regarding the applicant's awareness of the rule prohibiting unauthorised media contact. Further, that as an acting pool supervisor he would have relied on the collective agreement to manage the staff below him.

[15]    The city manager's circular was distributed like all other communications. The lack of a signature on the city manager's circular was not significant because it  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 5
was standard procedure for such circulars to have explanatory notes notifying employees that a signed copy was available at the city manager's office. The authenticity of the document was unquestionable even though it may be unsigned. Based on all these practices in place it was reasonable to assume the applicant had knowledge of the rule and ought to have known that the agreement prohibited such conduct. He clarified that the communication policy document was part of the applicant's bundle at his internal hearing and was not relied on by the respondent to prove its case against him.

[16]    The article dated 17 December 2009 had a direct quote from the applicant which was proof that he spoke to the press. Although it was the only article with a direct quote from the applicant, the other two make reference to him, implying some form of contact or an interview. He admitted that the article dated 11 March 2010 only refers to the applicant and implies that is what the applicant said but was not a direct quote from the applicant.

[17]    At his disciplinary hearing the applicant never attempted to prove that he did not go to the media, but rather tried to justify why he did so. This was consistent with the evidence of all his witnesses.

[18]    Under re-examination he confirmed that the applicant as an acting pool supervisor would have communications such as the city manager's circular and the code and collective agreements cascaded to him and as a supervisor would need to advise his subordinates of this information.

[19]    Zipho Maxwell Mathenjwa (Mathenjwa) testified to the meeting on 26 February 2010 where the applicant and his colleagues were warned that they were not allowed to communicate with the media. They were warned that some had gone to the media and it was not to be repeated without the permission of management. They claimed to be unaware of this prohibition.

[20]    Under cross-examination he stated the purpose of the meeting was to warn staff of the media issue and the process to becoming permanent pool supervisors.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 6

[21]    New employees receive the respondent's rules and policies at their inductions and this bundle was considered the bible guiding them on their employment with the respondent. Not only signed documents are considered binding since guidelines are sometimes handed down which the employees consider binding and adopt as undisputed practices. He considered the city manager's circular number 14/07 dated 21 August 2007 a binding document. Not all instructions are signed but employees are expected to comply with all instructions. All swimming pools are given a copy of the communications policy as adopted on 29 April 2009 and they held meetings where they discussed such documents.

Applicant's evidence and argument

[22]    The applicant denied the charges or committing any errors in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000. He denied the legitimacy of the rule or breaching the rule and claimed he was unaware of the rule. He also disputed that he was warned prior to being charged because he was charged prior to the warning of 26 February 2010.

[23]    The applicant's representative disputed the validity of the collective agreement because the version relied on by the respondent was a mere draft, unsigned, and therefore not binding on the parties. Furthermore it was also the subject of litigation in the Labour Appeal Court whose decision was pending. He argued that there was a memorandum that set out the interim employment relationship and conditions of service between the parties.

[24]    The applicant's representative on the first day of this hearing undertook to provide a copy of the said memorandum. By the end of the day he failed to produce it and undertook to do so when we reconvened on 21 February 2011. By the close of the second day of this arbitration he failed to produce the document but undertook to file same with his closing arguments. I received his closing arguments on 14 March 2011 with documents that did not clarify the issues to any further extent.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 7

[25]    Nhlanhla Alex Zikhali testified he was dismissed on 29 June 2010 for similar charges. The background was their objection to newcomers filling their positions of acting pool supervisors. They decided to report to their unions, the ombudsman and to scorpions insurance.

[26]    In addition to the above agreement, he personally decided to call Cannan Mdletshe (Mdletshe) from the Sowetan newspaper who agreed the decision appeared wrong and undertook to investigate. He also told Mdletshe the applicant was worse off as he was not receiving his acting allowance for months. This resulted in the article printed on 17 December 2009.

[27]    He then sought advice from one Advocate Khuzwayo because he wanted to challenge management. He could not respond to the challenge that if he claimed the meeting notified him that he could go to the press why he needed advice on it and he explained that he also wanted advice on the termination of his contract.

[28]    By the 26 February 2010 he had already briefed his media contact twice and he contacted Mdletshe again after this meeting which resulted in the third article being printed on 11 March 2010. He was unaware it was misconduct because he knew of no policy prohibiting it. In his research he found no reason why they could not contact the media.

[29]    In cross-examination he admitted receiving training on inter alia supervisor skills, similar to a management course, including responsibility for staff under one's control at the pool, how to discipline staff and liase with management. Although three attendants reported to him, during his 12 years as a supervisor he never came across the grievance policy.

[30]    He denied that he and the applicant went to the press or that the applicant was present when he telephoned Mdletshe on 14 December 2009. He was evasive about the contradictions between this evidence and that at the applicant's disciplinary hearing where he testified he shared the task of going to the media with the applicant.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 8

[31]    He denied the warning from the meeting of 26 February 2010 or that he would be disciplined for it. He disagreed that it was an offence. He was dismissed for similar charges. The respondent disputed this and rejected his incorrect subjective interpretation of the import of the article that the printed direct quote from the applicant in the article dated 17 December 2009 was a discussion about the applicant with Mdletshe. The article on 10 February 2010 and 11 March 2010 which stated that Xulu shared Zikhali's sentiments was hearsay by the reporter because he quoted the applicant's name to them (sic). The absence of the applicant's picture was proof that he did not speak to the press. He maintained there was no reason for him to protect the applicant.

[32]    The applicant Dumisani Xulu testified he was dismissed after being charged for unauthorised contact with and releasing privileged information to the media. This was preceded by the respondent's decision not to renew his contract as an acting pool supervisor which was difficult to accept because of the loss of his acting allowance and the fact that newcomers would take his position.

[33]    But he denied that it prompted him to go to the media. He was shocked after reading his name in the media and realised from Zikhali's quote that the latter had done so. He never discussed such action with Zikhali. The fact that his picture was not printed proved he never went to the press.

[34]    He was not aware of any policy prohibiting such conduct and was never inducted about respondent's rules regarding the media.

[35]    In cross-examination he confirmed his service as an acting pool supervisor for 10 years which included managing the employees appointed to his site. He inducted these employees by relying on information from a pool superintendent.

[36]    He maintained that his evidence at his disciplinary hearing was consistent with his evidence at this arbitration but could not remember his evidence to prove it. He was reminded of the evidence in his disciplinary hearing where Zikhali admitted that he shared the media duty with the applicant. Mkhwanazi another witness at his disciplinary hearing also stated that the applicant and Zikhali went to the press because they were worried. Kevin Manual, yet another witness at his disciplinary hearing also stated that the applicant and Zikhali went to the press.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 9

[37]    In response to the challenge that three witnesses confirmed he went to the media which he did not dispute at his disciplinary hearing, he replied that they assumed he went to the press because his name was mentioned in the articles. He did not dispute it at his disciplinary hearing because he did not know that he had to.

[38]    He confronted Zikhali and warned him that going to the media was going "too far". Zikhali used his name since he was aware of the applicant's financial woes as his friend and best man at his wedding.

[39]    He was reminded that the article on 17 December 2010 does not indicate reported speech by Zikhali but he maintained that it was Zikhali speaking in sympathy for him.

[40]    Zikhali took his charge sheet from him but he was vague about why he gave it to him when he knew his involvement with the press after the first article was printed. He then denied that he said he gave Zikhali the charge sheet but merely confirmed that he had one.

[41]    He was already charged on 26 February 2010 when they were warned not to go to the press and before the third article was printed on 11 March 2010. He also admitted the meeting appealed to them not to go to the press.

Analysis of evidence and argument

[42]    The questions which I am required to determine are whether the applicant's dismissal was substantively fair. I have in this regard taken note of section 188 of the Act in terms of which the respondent bears the onus to prove on a balance of probabilities that the applicant's dismissal was substantively fair. I read this section together with section 2(1) of Schedule 8 of the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, in terms of which a dismissal is unfair if it is not effected for a fair reason and in accordance with a fair procedure.

[43]    The onus to prove the fairness of a dismissal dispute rests on the respondent in terms of section 191(2) of the Act. The proof that is required is on a balance of probabilities.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 10

[44]    The charges preferred against the applicant are set out below in their entirety:

You failed to Conduct yourself in that you did not obey reasonable instructions given to you by your authorities when you allegedly made reports to the media (Sowetan newspaper) dated 17/12/10 and 10/02/10 respectively without seeking prior permission from your supervisors.
You failed to Conduct yourself in that you did not refrain from disclosing privileged information when you allegedly made reports to the media (Sowetan Newspaper) 17/12/10 and 10/02/10 respectively without seeking prior permission from your supervisors.

[45]    The applicant denied the charges.

The existence of the rule

[46]    Although the rule is not often in dispute because of the internal disciplinary code which sets out a list of offences, it was in dispute in this matter because the validity of the collective agreement was disputed and the respondent unfortunately did not place the current disciplinary code before me. The remaining documents were the city manager's circular and the communications policy. It was thus up to the respondent to prove the rule, by leading evidence that there was a common understanding about the rule and that it had existed for some time. The city manager's circular that set out the rule supported its submissions. As did the communications policy introduced at the disciplinary hearing by the applicant's union. The witnesses also explained that the rule exists and is well known. I also noted that beyond these facts, in terms of our common law of employment we can assume that certain rules apply to all employment relationships.

[47]    Thus when a disciplinary code does not exist or may omit a rule or, as in this case, where the collective agreement was in dispute, the rule can be established by showing that our employment law has always included that understanding of  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 11
discipline, even if it is not part of a code. The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal recognises that some rules or standards may be so well established and known that it is not necessary to communicate them. I therefore find that even where alleged misconduct is not specifically listed in the employer's disciplinary code, there is a standard of ethical behaviour about which employees do not need to be reminded and it is of no consequence that the misconduct is not specifically described in a code or agreement.

Is the rule valid or reasonable?

[48]    If the rule is completely arbitrary or cannot be shown to be linked to a 'commercial rationale', then the rule is probably invalid or unreasonable. The applicant argued that the rule was not 'legitimate', meaning whether the rule was justified and a fair one in the context of his workplace. If the legitimacy of the rule is challenged, this will usually be a question of law and fact. The legal position might come from the understanding about the employment relationship and the factual position will be about the rule in that particular workplace and why it is needed and justified. Because sections 188(1) and 192(2) of the Act require the employer to prove that a dismissal is fair, the employer bore the onus to establish that the rule which led to the dismissal is valid or reasonable. The respondent did not get any of its witnesses to answer either at the disciplinary hearing or this arbitration: "Why does this rule exist in this workplace?" This issue which was relevant in this case was the fact that the respondent is subject to a statutory domain where employees must act in its best interests and in such a way that its credibility and integrity are not compromised. On the evidence before me I find the applicant was well acquainted enough to acquire an appropriate understanding of the operational environment and requirements of the respondent's rules.

Did the employee have knowledge of the rule?

[49]    The applicant denied any knowledge of the rule, therefore the respondent had to lead evidence to show that the rule exists in a disciplinary code, or was established through collective bargaining, or was communicated through a memorandum, or came to the minds of applicant in some way. As it is a basic  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 12
principle of fairness that a person should not be disciplined for an offence about which he had no knowledge, the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal requires that "the standards of conduct are clear and made available to employees in a manner that is easily understood". Some rules or standards may be so well established and known that it is not necessary to communicate them" (Paragraph 3(1)). This makes possible the alternative question to "Did the employee know of the rule?" but whether the "the employee could reasonably be expected to know of the rule?" I considered the applicant's denial of any knowledge but find the respondent discharged this onus by presenting the evidence of Chizzari and Mathenjwa that there were sufficient procedures for the applicant to have acquainted himself with the rule and even the appreciation of his duty in this regard.

Did the applicant commit the misconduct with which he is charged?

[50]    The applicant denied breaching the rule, and the respondent had to establish the misconduct through witnesses in a clear and credible way, that the employee actually committed the offence. The test is whether the applicant on a balance of probability committed the offence.

[51]    The respondent's evidence was that it considered all three articles and the article dated 17 December 2009 had a direct quote from the applicant which was proof that he spoke to the press. Although it was the only article with a direct quote from the applicant, the other two made reference to him, implying some form of contact or an interview. The references to his charges proved that he had provided them with his charge sheet and letter of termination since only he was issued with that document. This was consistent with its evidence at the disciplinary hearing.

[52]    A scrutiny of the disciplinary hearing transcript supports the respondent's evidence that he failed to dispute his own witness's evidence that he did in fact go to the press and was commended for it. At this arbitration he defended this failure by contending that he did not know that he had to dispute such evidence of his guilt. His witnesses testified to material aspects and his explanation for his failure to challenge their evidence at his disciplinary hearing is without merit especially since he was represented. Chizzari  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 13
also testified that at his disciplinary hearing the applicant never attempted to prove that he did not go to the media, but rather tried to justify why he did so. This was consistent with the evidence of all his witnesses.

[53]    At this arbitration, the applicant's defence was based on a complete denial that he went to the press or divulged privileged information, that there was no evidence of such misconduct and the evidence that was presented was hearsay evidence from Zikhali. Whilst in practical terms I find that his version could be true, but within the context of the evidence that was before me I reject the applicant's evidence because of his questionable credibility for the following reasons:

[54]    He presented as an informed applicant and aware of his responsibilities in advancing his defence and was represented by his trade union at his disciplinary hearing and this arbitration. Zikhali's evidence that he pursued his press contact and only later told applicant and his colleagues is inconsistent with the direct quote from the applicant in the first article published on 17 December 2009. This direct quote is consistent with applicant's witness's evidence at his disciplinary hearing that he did go to the press. I found that Zikali was not an honest witness because he denied the warning from the meeting of 26 February 2010 and also maintained that this latter meeting of 26 February 2010 advised that he could go to the press. This was inconsistent with the applicant's admission of the warning of that meeting and his testimony that the meeting also appealed to them not to go to the press. It created doubt on the credibility of his version that sought to corroborate the applicant's innocence.

[55]    The sole basis of applicant's denial were his mischievous comments that the journalist misrepresented the direct quote but was in fact reporting hearsay from his friend Zikhali and that the latter mentioned him to the journalist out of sympathy for his financial woes. Failing to explain the fact of a published direct quote and attempting to discredit the journalist by alleging it was hearsay from Zikahli is serious. It leads me to believe that he fabricated this accusation against the journalist to exonerate himself. The references to the applicant in the three articles are not vague but relevant to the evidence of the dispute between the parties. The evidence is that the applicant was upset at having to revert to being  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 14
a pool attendant after his contract as an acting pool supervisor was terminated and being overlooked for "newcomers". It is also not disputed that the applicant and his colleagues agreed on a plan of action to seek redress. The fact that there are no pictures of the applicant does not prove that he was not interviewed or that he did not contact the media and provide privileged information.

[56]    With regard to the second charge the applicant initially admitted he gave Zikali his charge sheet. He was then vague and unable to explain why he did so if knew Zikali was responsible for the press coverage of their alleged unfair treatment. He then denied that he ever said that he gave Zikhali his charge sheet. His evidence failed to explain how the reporter would have published information of his charge sheet and letter of termination unless he provided it or handed it to Zikhali for onward transmission.

[57]    I do not accept the applicant's denial or evidence that the journalist misrepresented the direct quote or was reporting hearsay from Zikhali.

[58]    I find that the sequence of events as described led to circumstances where it is probable that applicant, angered by the respondent's decision, decided to expose it and to place pressure on it. Zikhali's evidence that he disagreed with respondent's instruction that he was not allowed to go to the media and that he researched the issue and believed there was no bar to him doing so, an assessment which in the context of their friendship, more probably than not influenced the applicant's decision as well. I accordingly find that it is more probable than not that the applicant did contact the media and did divulge privileged information to the media without the required permission from a manager.

[59]    For the sake of completeness I note that the applicant's representative made an attempt to argue the defence of protected disclosure in terms of Act 26 of 2000 but he did not support this by leading any relevant evidence before me and I accordingly dismiss it.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 15

Was the respondent's decision to dismiss fair?

[60]    The respondent bore the onus to prove the fairness of the dismissal and to discharge this onus the respondent had to provide evidence that dismissal was the appropriate response to the breach of the rule and demonstrate why the rule was viewed in a serious light to substantiate the claim. I considered why the employer imposed dismissal against the basis of the employee's challenge of it in the context of the employer's operational requirements.

[61]    The respondent's evidence of why it imposed dismissal was that it was "serious misconduct". Then in its closing arguments it submitted that the applicant's acts can only be viewed as acts of defiance and not being exemplary to those he supervised and his claim of unfair dismissal should be dismissed. I considered whether the respondent demonstrated any of the above contentions or even argued that it was self-demonstrative because it is a statutory body operating within a definite statutory environment in order to achieve statutory objectives.

[62]    I noted that to dismiss a person with 10 years' service with no evidence of a disciplinary record, the respondent had to show that the misconduct was serious misconduct, defiance and not exemplary to those he supervised as contended. Our case law has now made clear that no submission regarding dismissal and the appropriateness of dismissal should merely be made as a passing remark and must be substantiated by a witness testifying under oath.

[63]    In evaluating the totality of the circumstances I did not lose sight of any possible impact on the respondent and its operational milieu and the consequence for it of any alternative order. Or that applicant had a window period during which the respondent did not proceed against him for the first two articles published with the proviso that the warning of 26 February 2010 be respected, which did not happen. While I noted his contention that he was charged before the warning, but from the evidence after the respondent issued the warning, the applicant's response was to repeat his action as per the article of 11 March 2010. He thus shut the door on his opportunity to convey good faith on his part and I return to this aspect later.

 
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 16

[64]    In considering the respondent's evidence in support of its contention of serious misconduct, I also noted that striking a balance between an employee's right to free speech in the workplace on the one hand, and the respondent's right to its reputation on the other, requires a delicate balancing of the parties' rights, taking into account all the facts of each specific case. Whilst conduct involving the disclosure of information that is absolutely vital to the operation of a respondent, the disclosure of which would materially and irreparably affect the smooth running of the respondent and cause irreparable harm to its reputation or functioning, may constitute an infringement of its as aforementioned -- I found no argument or evidence that advanced or sustained any of the above aspects to make a finding in support of the respondent's case that there was serious misconduct justifying dismissal or of how the respondent concluded that the point had been reached where the employment of applicant could not be continued.

[65]    Ultimately, the issue before me resolves into this crisp question: is it my conclusion that the respondent has shown that its decision to dismiss the applicant was fair? It is not. Accordingly, that decision cannot stand.

[66]    The applicant has sought reinstatement and the respondent's evidence does not militate against reinstatement. The date of his dismissal was the 29 June 2010 and the applicant earned R 6 954–24 per month at the time of dismissal. He is entitled to part of his arrear salary in the sum of R 34 771–20 (R 6 954.24 x 5) which is his salary from 29 June 2010 (date of dismissal) to 30 November 2010.

[67]    The reason for the above award arises from the applicant's misconduct since I find that whilst the evidence did not support a finding that his misconduct warranted dismissal, it does support a penalty being imposed. As mentioned earlier in this award, the applicant contended he was charged before the warning, but from the evidence, after the respondent issued the warning, the applicant's response was to repeat his action as per the article of 11 March 2010, knowing full well that he was to face disciplinary proceedings. He thus shut the door on his opportunity to convey good faith on his part and I accordingly find that it is just  
[2012] JOL 28427 (SALGBC) at 17
and equitable to order the reinstatement to be retrospective for a period of five months only.

[68]    I also find that it would be appropriate to order that a final written warning be issued against the applicant in accordance with the terms of the applicable disciplinary code.

Award

[69]    I find the dismissal of the applicant Dumisani Xulu by the respondent eThekwini Municipality: Parks, Recreation & Cultural Unit was substantively unfair.

[70]    The respondent, eThekwini Municipality: Parks, Recreation & Cultural Unit is directed to reinstate the applicant Dumisani Xulu to his former position as pool attendant on the same terms and conditions of employment in existence at the time of his dismissal.

[71]    The order in paragraph 69 is to operate retrospectively for a period of five months from the date of this award.

[72]    The amount to be awarded to the applicant in terms of paragraph 69 is R34 771,20 and is to be paid to him within 14 days of being notified of this award.

[73]    The applicant must report for duty to the respondent's premises within three (3) working days of him receiving this award.

[74]    The respondent is to issue a final written warning against the applicant in accordance with the terms of the applicable disciplinary code.

Appearance:
Mr Papane (At); Mr Ngcobo (R)


End of Document