



South African Railways Appellant v Stegmann Respondent 1932 AD 318
All South African Law Reports

Division: Appellate Division
Date: 1932. September 6, 13. 
WESSELS, A.C.J.; CURLEWIS, J.A; STRATFORD, J.A, and ROOS, J.A. WESSELS, A.C.J.; CURLEWIS, J.A; STRATFORD, J.A, and ROOS, J.A.
Keywords


Negligence. --- Proximate cause. --- Successive negligent acts. --- Collision at railway level crossing.
Headnote
When a Court has to deal with modern quick-moving traffic, though it is sometimes possible where the parties are successively negligent to determine which negligence was in the result the cause of the accident, in most such cases the last acts follow one another so closely in time and are so closely inter-connected as to justify the view that the resulting damage was due to the negligence of both parties.
A collision at a railway level crossing between an engine and a motor car found, on the facts, to have been due to the negligence of both the engine driver and the driver of the motor car, and the minor children of the driver of the car, who was killed, accordingly held entitled to recover damages from the Railway Administration.
The decision of the Orange Free State Provincial Division in Stegmann v South African Railways confirmed.
Case Information
Appeal from a decision of the Orange Free State Provincial Division (DE VILLIERS, J.P.).
The facts appear from the judgment of WESSELS, A.C.J.
C. F. Steyn, K.C. (with him, W. de Villiers), for the appellant. F. P de Wet (with him, N. J. Grobler), for the respondent.
Cur adv vult.
Postea (September 13th).
1932 AD at Page 319

WESSELS, A.C.J.: The plaintiff in the court below claimed damages on behalf of her four minor children, from the South African Railway Department for having on 2nd January, 1931, negligently caused the death of their father, J. C de V. Stegmann, in a collision between a motor car the latter was driving and the engine of a goods train. This collision occurred at a level crossing near Rhenosterkop station where a public road crosses the main line.

The facts are briefly as follows: The deceased, on the morning of the 2nd January, 1931, was travelling from Murraysburg towards Worcester with his wife and two daughters. The motor car reached the neighbourhood of Rhenosterkop station about 9 a m. They stopped for breakfast on the road about 300 yards from the crossing where the accident occurred. The surrounding country near the crossing is quite open. After breakfast the car, a tourer Ford car with its flaps closed, proceeded towards the crossing, in the same direction as the train. It was travelling about 15 miles per hour until it reached the east gate of the crossing. This gate on the east side of the line was open, whilst the one on the west side was closed. The road cuts the rails at an angle of 69 degrees and rises towards the rails to a height of three feet. The distance from the east gate --- the one which was open --- to the rails is 55 feet. From the rails to the closed or western gate, the distance is 75 feet. As the car approached the crossing, the deceased slackened speed. Parties admit that the rails were approached from the gate at a pace of more or less five miles per hour. There is no doubt whatever that if the deceased had kept a proper look-out, he must have seen the train approaching the crossing from Rhenosterkop long before the collision occurred. The only explanation of his coming upon the rails without seeing the train is that he was inattentive, or preoccupied with something else. That he did not hear the noise of the train may be due to the fact that the train was coming down an incline and that the flaps of his car were up and that there was a slight breeze from the south. The wheel marks of the car show that there was some diminution in the speed at the open gate, and between the gate and the rails there were two skid marks, when apparently the brakes had been applied. The car then proceeded so that its front wheels crossed the first or left rail and after that the tracks run more or less parallel

1932 AD at Page 320

with the left rail. The probability is that the car was not at right angles to the track when the actual collision occurred. The deceased probably became aware of the train and attempted to swerve his car in the direction in which the train was travelling. The train pushed the car in the direction in which it was itself moving and the car continued to travel on its wheels until it came to a stop. The impact had unfortunately killed Mr. Stegmann, but the other occupants escaped with a severe shaking.

I will now turn to the movement of the train shortly before the collision. The train, when it approached Rhenosterkop station slowed down to receive the usual authority ticket or tablet to proceed. This consists of a metal container in which is placed a printed form, giving the engine driver his right to proceed and informing him what he was to do between Rhenosterkop and the next station. This tablet the fireman received at Rhenosterkop. He opened the container, read the order and then handed it to the engine driver of the train, who read it and returned it to the fireman. Robert Burns, the engine driver of the train (whose testimony the learned Judge in the court below accepted) tells us that he travelled through Rhenosterkop at about 20 miles per hour. Before reaching the station he sounded the whistle. After the fireman picked up the authority for proceeding, the guard gave the engine driver the "right-away" signal, and thereupon the whistle was again sounded. This happened as the train was leaving the station. When the train passed the south end points. (i.e. about 600 yards from the crossing where the accident occurred) the engine driver sounded the whistle again. This was a long whistle, and was intended as a warning for the crossing. The train then proceeded on its way at 25 miles per hour more or less. Shortly before reaching the crossing another whistle was sounded. I will deal more fully with this last whistle later as there is a considerable argument as to what distance from the crossing this whistle was sounded. In all, therefore, according to Burns, five whistles were sounded in the neighbourhood of Rhenosterkop station: (1) a whistle to warn the station of the train's approach, (2) and (3) two short whistle, to acknowledge the stationmaster's signals of right away, (4) a long whistle after passing the south end points and (5) a whistle 20 yards from the crossing. After the last whistle was sounded in the neighbourhood of the

1932 AD at Page 321

crossing the fireman heard a rumbling on the ballast at the crossing for a couple of seconds and thought it was caused by a broken engine spring. The fireman shouted something and thereupon the engine driver put on the brakes and brought the train to a standstill.

The engine driver, who stood on the right of the cab, had a clear view of the crossing from Rhenosterkop station. He could also see the public road on his left for a considerable distance, though as he approached the crossing his view on the left was obscured owing to the bull of the boiler in front of the cab (the length of the engine in front of the cab is 33 feet). On the right there was nothing to obstruct his vision. He only lost sight of the crossing when some 20 yards away from it.

The fireman on the other hand had a clear view of the road and of the line on the left side practically from Rhenosterkop station to the crossing. There was nothing whatever to obscure his view. Neither engine driver nor fireman saw the car approaching the crossing. In fact even after the collision occurred they did not know that the train had collided with a motor car. It was only after the train had stopped that they became aware of it. They stopped the train because they thought that a spring of the engine had been broken. There can be no excuse either for the engine driver or fireman in not having seen the approach of the car to the crossing. The fact that they had to open the tablet containing the authority to proceed and that this may have distracted their attention from the crossing is no excuse whatever. It was of more importance that one of them should keep a good look out when approaching the level crossing, which they would reach soon after leaving Rhenosterkop, than that both should devote so much attention to the authority to proceed as to neglect a sharp look out at the crossing. The regulations enjoin both engine drivers and firemen to keep a good look out especially when they are approaching and passing inter alia level crossings. There is, therefore, no doubt that both the engine driver and the fireman were negligent in not having kept a proper look out when approaching the crossing. In the same way the driver of the motor car was negligent in crossing the rails, when, had he looked properly, he must have seen the approaching train. Had this been a case where the driver of the car sued the

1932 AD at Page 322

Railway Administration for damages on account of injuries sustained in a collision, he would have failed in his action, as both parties would have been in pari delicto. The present case, however, is not a suit by the injured party but an action by the widow on behalf of her minor children. In such a case the children are entitled to recover damages even though the death of the father was due to the joint negligence of himself and the other party. This is the principle underlying the decision of this Court in Union Government v Lee 1927 AD 202.

Dr. Steyn in an able argument has urged us to say that even if the driver and fireman were negligent, yet the proximate cause of the accident was the negligence of the driver of the motor car in not taking reasonable care to avoid the accident when he could have done so. He endeavoured to show that the death of the deceased was due not so much to the joint negligence of himself and the railway servants, as to the last negligent acts of the deceased. In other words, that if the deceased had used reasonable care during the last stages which led to the collision, he could have avoided the accident and that it was his duty to have done so. Dr. Steyn's argument may be stated in this form. Assume that both engine driver and fireman did not keep a proper look out: assume that they should have whistled earlier than near the crossing, then yet, when the last whistle was sounded, the deceased had ample time to have avoided the accident because that whistle was not sounded as the engine driver Burns thought, 20 yards from the crossing, but a distance of at least 80 yards from it. When the train was travelling at more or less 25 miles per hour and the car at 5 miles per hour, the latter must have been more or less 40 feet away from the point of impact, and therefore, the deceased, had he exercised reasonable care, ought to have been able to stop his car and so to have avoided the collision; whereas it was quite impossible for the engine driver to have stopped his train within 300 or 400 yards. This involves an examination of the question whether Burns was underestimating the distance when he says that he blew the last blast 20 yards from the crossing.

Dr. Steyn relies on the evidence of Burns and on that of Mrs. Stegmann for his contention that the last whistle must have been sounded some 80 yards from the crossing. Burns states in his

1932 AD at Page 323

evidence that although he is accustomed to blow the last whistle quite near the crossing, he blew a longer blast than usual because he saw a little native girl running over the line at the crossing. He saw her emerge from in front of the engine from his left to his right side. He blew the longer blast not because he was afraid of running over the girl, but because he knew there were always children playing about the line. Burns says he would have whistled even if the native girl had not gone over the line, though perhaps not so long, even though he knew that it would be of no avail as a warning. He sounded the whistle because he was in the habit of doing so at that point, and because he thought that he ought to do so in terms of the regulations. Now if Burns is correct when he says that he saw the little girl run over the line and saw her emerge in front of his engine, and if Mrs. Stegmann is correct in saying that she saw the girl at the gate just before the accident, then the little girl could not have reached the gate, a distance of 75 feet, where Mrs. Stegmann says she saw her, in the time that the train travelled 20 yards, i.e. 22 seconds more or less. It is contended that the whistle must therefore have been sounded further away from the crossing than 20 yards and nearer 80 yards than 20. The learned judge dismissed this view of the facts because he accepted the positive evidence of Burns that he sounded the last whistle more or less 20 yards from the crossing. Burns maintained that this was the distance both in examination and in cross-examination and said that it was customary for him to blow the whistle at that distance. Moreover the probabilities are in favour of that view because if the whistle had been sounded at 80 yards or more it is difficult to conceive why neither the deceased nor Mrs. Stegmann nor her daughter heard it. If on the other hand the whistle was sounded almost as the train was upon them, it is quite possible that the whistle and the noise of the rushing train followed so closely that Mr. Stegmann has no distinct recollection of any whistle. It is also probable that Burns is mistaken when he says that he saw the native girl crossing the line and emerging from the left front of his engine. She was at that moment in all probability further away and nearer the gate. At any rate the learned Judge who saw the witnesses, places great reliance on Burns's estimate of the distance he was away when he blew the

1932 AD at Page 324

lost blast, and we see no reason to differ from his finding in that respect. The learned judge, from all the circumstances of the accident, was rather of opinion that the whistle was sounded if it was sounded at all, not more than 10 yards from the crossing. He says that this accounts for the fact "why neither the deceased nor his wife nor the little girl who gave evidence, heard the whistle. It was because the whistle was sounded immediately before the impact --- a fraction of a second before --- and the whistle was drowned and lost to the occupants of the car in the general noise of the rushing engine and the impact itself." It is also possible that Mrs. Stegmann's recollection after all that she went through is not accurate as regards the exact position of the little native girl. If we accept the finding of the learned Judge, and we see no reason for not doing so, then it is clear that the engine driver and fireman were negligent in not having seen the car approaching the crossing, and they were negligent in not having given a warning whistle, not 20 yards from the crossing where it was of no use whatever, but a whistle beginning some 300 yards from the crossing and continuing for some time. I say that the warning signal at the crossing should have started at about 300 yards away because this is what the railway regulation requires. The regulation as regards whistling at crossings is as follows. "(2) Trains approaching level crossing: engine whistle to be sounded. Drivers must sound one long whistle whilst approaching and passing a whistle board, or, in the absence of a whistle board, approximately 300 yards before reaching the level crossing. Drivers must keep a vigilant outlook, and except as provided in the following sub-clause (3) or where otherwise provided in local appendices they must again sound the engine whistle for a period of five seconds from a point approximately 150 yards short of the crossing."

If a whistle had been sounded according to regulation, the deceased would in all probability have heard it, because we are told that even though the flaps of the car were up, this would not have affected the bearing of the engine whistle by a person in the car. As the learned Judge has pointed out, the whistle at the points of the Rhenosterkop station was no warning at all, it was much too far off. The proximate cause of the accident, therefore, was not the negligence of the deceased, but the joint

1932 AD at Page 325

negligence of the two parties. In Union Government v Lee (supra) at p. 216 INNES, C.J say: "But though it is generally possible, where the parties are successively negligent, to determine which negligence was in the result the cause of the accident, I can see no reason why joint negligence should not sometimes be found to exist at the final stage in such cases also. There is no ground of principle to prevent the existence of joint negligence at the final stage of an extended occurrence any more than at the single stage of an instantaneous one. The last acts may follow one another so closely in time, and be also so closely inter-connected as to justify the view that the resulting damage was due to the negligence of both parties. Everything depends on the facts." I should have preferred the learned Chief Justice to have said that when we are dealing with modern very quick-moving traffic, though it is sometimes possible where the parties are successively negligent to determine which negligence was in the result the cause of the accident, in most such cases the last acts follow one another so closely in time and are so closely inter-connected as to justify the view that the resulting damage was due to the negligence of both parties.

Dr. Stein has also argued that if the occupants of the car did not hear the whistle 20 yards away, why should we assume that they would have heard the whistle had it been sounded where the whistle boards are now placed, some 275 yards from the crossing? The answer is that we do not know that the deceased did not hear the last blast. From the wheel tracks of the car the probability is that he either heard the whistle or saw the train and, therefore, turned in its direction hoping to avoid it. The object of sounding a warning whistle at a proper distance from a crossing is to enable persons approaching the level crossing and not hearing the noise of the train or seeing its approach, to be warned of the threatened danger. On a down gradient trains sometimes run so smoothly that, one does not hear their approach and, therefore, it is essential that the regulation as to whistling timeously on nearing a crossing should be strictly observed, and the failure to observe it is a negligent act. As was pointed out in Lee's case, a whistle blown too late is of no value whatever as a warning and instead of avoiding an accident may, by

1932 AD at Page 326

distracting the attention, cause confusion of thought and action at a critical moment and so assist in bringing about rather than in avoiding an accident.

In these circumstances the appeal must fail with costs.

CURLEWIS, J.A, STRATFORD, J.A, and ROOS, J.A, concurred.

Appeal accordingly dismissed.

Appellant's Attorneys: Marais & de Villiers, Bloemfontein. Respondent's Attorneys: de Wet & Conradie, Bloemfontein.



End of Document