



Ramakgale / Public Service Association [2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GATW3414-23
Date: 10/06/2024
Before: M Mohlala, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Procedural unfairness — Postponement — Presiding officer refusing to postpone disciplinary hearing even though accused employee submitted medical certificate confirming that he had been admitted to hospital — Dismissal procedurally unfair.
Dismissal — Substantive unfairness — Misconduct — Assault — Provocation — Senior employee punching board member after being subjected to stream of insults — Provocation mitigating severity of assault and rendering dismissal inappropriate.
Dismissal — Substantive unfairness — Misconduct — Breach of procurement policies — Senior employee dismissed for allegedly breaching procurement policies and ignoring instruction from board without proof of either alleged offence — Dismissal unfair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a general manager, was dismissed by the respondent (“PSA”) after being found guilty of various breaches of the PSA’s procurement policy, causing irregular expenditure, disobeying an instruction from the board and assaulting a board member. He claimed that his dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair. The PSA maintained that he was guilty on all counts, as had been found by a disciplinary tribunal held in his absence.

While analysing each of the charges, the Commissioner found that the appointment of a consulting firm to assist in recruiting a deputy manager which was not on the PSA database was justifiable because the list of approved consultants had been “contaminated” and firms not on the data base had been regularly used to assist with recruiting senior employees, including the recruitment of the applicant himself. The PSA had produced no evidence to prove quotations had not been sourced from consultants on the database. The applicant’s claim that he had done so therefore had to be accepted. 

As to the charge relating to non-compliance with an instruction from the board, the applicant had reported the issue of the appointment of the consultant, a full board meeting had merely “noted” what was discussed and the recruitment process had not been halted. The decision to suspend the applicant had been taken after a round robin meeting was convened to deal with the matter. This did not constitute a valid board meeting and the applicant was, accordingly, not obliged to comply with the instruction. It was apparent that the applicant had been put to terms by a disgruntled faction on the board which did not have its  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 998
way in the appointment of the DGM. The PSA had also led no evidence to prove that the applicant had incurred wasteful expenditure.

Turning to the assault, the Commissioner noted that the incident had been recorded on CCTV. The applicant had testified that the board member had brought police officers to arrest him and that when he approached the director’s car he (the director) had threatened to beat him up and continued with a stream of insults which ended with a reference to the applicant’s mother. The applicant had then lost control of himself and punched the director. The director had not testified at the arbitration. The Commissioner found that the director had provoked the applicant, which meant that, in law, the applicant had acted during a “temporary loss of control”. This, counted as a strong mitigating factor and rendered dismissal inappropriate.

The Commissioner found further that the PSA had led no evidence to indicate why the presiding officer had refused to postpone the hearing even though the applicant had submitted a medical certificate from a psychiatrist confirming that the applicant had been admitted to hospital and his then attorneys had requested a postponement. This rendered the dismissal procedurally unfair as the applicant had been deprived of the opportunity of defending himself.

The applicant was reinstated with retrospective effect, with back pay of more than R5m. 

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation 
This is the award in the arbitration between Marcus Antonio Ramakgale (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”) and Public Service Association (“PSA”) (hereinafter referred to as “the respondent”). The matter was referred in respect of an unfair dismissal related to misconduct in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (as amended) (the “LRA”).
The applicant was in attendance throughout the proceedings and was represented by Mr Ndumiso Ntshaba, an admitted attorney from Ndumiso Voyi Incorporated Attorneys, while the respondent was represented by Advocate Kerensa Millard of Cheadle Thompson and Haysom instructed by Mr Amos Gwebityala of Cheadle Thompson and Haysom Incorporated Attorneys.
The respondent submitted a bundle of documents which was marked as Bundle “R1” consisting of pages 1–1023 as well as a video footage of the alleged assault incident. The applicant’s bundle of documents was marked as Bundle “A” consisting of pages 1– 47. The parties were allowed an opportunity to supplement their bundles as the need arose during the proceedings. A further document marked “C” formed part of the proceedings subsequent to my ruling that the respondent submitted to the proceedings email exchanges between the applicant and his personal assistant from 1 January 2022 to 3 April 2022. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 999
The proceedings were digitally recorded and hand-written notes were also taken. Interpretation services were not required. At the conclusion of the proceedings, the parties requested to submit written closing arguments. The respondent was to make its submission on 27 May 2024 followed by the applicant’s answering on 31 May 2024 with the respondent having an option to reply on 3 June 2024. I am highly indebted to the parties for their compliance with the set deadlines for submissions.

Background Information 
The applicant was employed by the respondent on 15 September 2021 and was dismissed on 3 February 2022. He occupied the position of General Manager and earned R3 937 409 per year. He referred an alleged unfair dismissal dispute relating to misconduct. He was charged and dismissed on the following allegations:
“Failing to comply with and/or intentionally contravening the prescripts of the Procurement Policy in that he appointed Lesele Consulting, a service provider not on the approved database, without sourcing quotations as required by the Procurement Policy.
Failing and/or refusing to comply with an instruction from the board, given on 20 May 2022, that he:
Provide the board with all information relating to the procurement of the service provider appointed to assist with the recruitment of the Deputy General Manager;
Disclosure of all deviations from the procurement policy and recruitment and selection policy; and
Suspend with immediate effect the recruitment process pending the board discussions on the information to be provided by him.
Deviating from the Procurement policy without obtaining the approval of the board;
Causing PSA to incur irregular expenditure in the amount of R320 000 as a consequence of the appointment of Lesele Consulting and placing the PSA at risk of being put into disrepute and exposing it to labour disputes; and
On 20 July 2022, attending the offices of the PSA while on suspension, in contravention of the terms of the suspension, and physically assaulting Dr Lufuno Mulaudzi, a board member of the PSA and the President of the PSA.
The applicant disputed the substantive and procedural fairness of his dismissal. The parties concluded a pre-arbitration minute. After listing the charges on the basis of which the applicant was dismissed, the pre-arbitration minute, in essence, stated that it was common cause that the disciplinary hearing was first scheduled to start on 13 July 2022 but did not proceed; following numerous postponements, it was scheduled to proceed on 19 and 20 January 2023; on 18 January 2023 the applicant applied for postponement and the hearing chairperson denied it through a  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1000
  written ruling dispatched to the applicant by email. The disciplinary hearing proceeded on 20 January 2023 and the chairperson of the hearing found the applicant guilty on four counts of misconduct and communicated his dismissal by a letter dated 3 February 2023.
The pre-arbitration minute further stated, as disputed facts, the following:
Whether the applicant failed to comply with, or intentionally contravened, the respondent’s Procurement Policy in appointing Lesele Consulting.
Whether the applicant appointed Lesele Consulting without sourcing quotations.
Whether the board gave an instruction or issued a request to the applicant on 20 May 2022 as alleged under paragraphs 4.1 to 4.3 of charge 2.
Whether the Procurement policy requires any deviation from the policy to be approved by the Board.
Whether the applicant was required to seek and obtain the Board’s approval for deviating from the prescripts of the Procurement Policy in appointing Lesele Consulting.
Whether the applicant attended at the offices of the respondent in 2022 whilst on suspension.
Whether the applicant assaulted or was assaulted by Dr Lufuno Mulaudzi.

Issues to be determined
In terms of the pre-arbitration minute, the issues to be decided is whether or not the dismissal of the applicant by the respondent was substantively and/or procedurally fair; the relief to be afforded to the applicant should the dismissal be found to have been substantively and/or procedurally unfair.
The applicant seeks retrospective reinstatement without any loss in salary and benefits and the respondent seeks the dismissal of the applicant’s dispute.

Preliminary Matters 
At the commencement of the proceedings on 31 July 2023, the applicant requested that the respondent furnish him with certain documents for purposes of his litigation. There was no need for me to issue a formal ruling as there was no formal discovery application before me but a request from the applicant which the respondent was willing to accede to. 
The applicant requested recordings of the disciplinary enquiry, FFS Report (Investigation Report); emails exchanged between the applicant and his personal assistant during April and May 2022; emails exchanged between the applicant and the chairperson of the Board during December 2021 regarding the implementation of the FFS Report; Section 165 of the Companies Act Demand Investigation Report; notice of meeting of Board  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1001
  meeting of 20 May 2022; Minutes of Board meeting of 20 May 2022; Information or documents pertaining to the appointment of a service provider to handle the filling of General Manager’s position subsequent to the dismissal of the applicant; 2020/2021 standing Board Resolution adopted by the PSA Board to the effect that no investigation or action against anyone in the PSA shall be taken without an affidavit done by the whistle-blower and PSA Board Resolution to suspend and charge the applicant; PSA Board Resolution for the applicant to suspend the process of appointing the Deputy General Manager.
The respondent furnished the applicant with the documents as requested except for the section 165 Demand Investigation Report to which it claimed that privilege attached to that document and called upon the applicant to make a formal application for the discovery of same. However, the applicant, on its own during the proceedings, found the report in question and supplemented its bundle of documents accordingly.

Analysis of evidence and arguments
The respondent called Ms Adri Alberts (“Adri”), PSA Payroll Master, who had a smoke break during the alleged assault incident. The respondent’s second witness was Mr Matimba Justice Shiburi, PSA Board Member and President of PSA arising out of elections in September 2023. (“Shiburi”). Pierre Snyman, chairperson of the Board at the time of the applicant’s dismissal, was the respondent’s third witness. Ms Madeleine Muller (“Muller”) was the respondent’s fourth and last witness whose current position with the respondent is that of PSA Acting Deputy Manager: Management Services, a position she occupied since 8 June 2022. Prior to this position, she occupied the position of General Manager: Finance. 
The applicant testified for his case and called two other witnesses [sic] for his case. Mr Maxwell Tsekiso Sebati (“Sebati”) who was with the applicant during the alleged assault incident, was the applicant’s second witness. The applicant’s third and last witness was Mr Cebo Mntwini (“Mntwini”), former PSA Board Member and Vice President at the time that the applicant was suspended and subsequently dismissed [sic].
All witnesses testified under oath. Section 138(7)(a) of the LRA provides that the commissioner must issue an arbitration award with brief reasons. It is therefore not the purpose of this award to provide a detailed account of all the evidence and arguments placed before me at arbitration as same have been considered in arriving at the decision I make below. 
Section 192(1) of the LRA provides that in any proceedings concerning any dismissal, the employee must establish the existence of the dismissal. Subsection (2) of this section further provides that if the existence of the dismissal is established, the employer must prove that the dismissal is fair. Establishing the existence of the dismissal was not necessary in this matter as it was common cause that the applicant was dismissed on 3 February 2023.  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1002
What stood to be determined is whether the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally and substantively fair. I intend to commence with the substantive fairness of the dismissal in relation to the reasons or alleged transgressions for which the applicant was dismissed. This determination will focus on whether the applicant had committed the offences in question as listed in the pre-arbitration minute. I will, therefore, be addressing the issues I have to determine as listed by the parties in their pre-arbitration minute.
The first allegation or offence that the applicant was held to have committed was that of allegedly failing to comply with and/or intentionally contravening the prescripts of the procurement policy in that he had appointed Lesele Consulting, a service provider not on the approved database, without sourcing quotations as required by the procurement policy.

Approving Lesele Consulting not on the approved database
Shiburi, Madeleine, Snyman, Mntwini and the applicant testified on this aspect of the first charge. All witnesses agreed that the PSA Procurement Policy is and was applicable to all PSA employees and the PSA Board. There was also agreement that, in terms of the Policy, three quotations have to be sourced from approved suppliers on the PSA database. It was not in dispute that Lesele Consulting was not on the PSA database of service providers when the applicant procured its services for the recruitment of the position of Deputy General Manager: Members Affairs (“DGM”).
What stands to be determined in this regard, is whether the applicant had committed an offence when he utilised Lesele Consulting for the recruitment of the DGM post. The applicant’s defence was that there was a forensic investigation by Fundudzi Forensic Services (FFS Report) commissioned by the PSA Board which discovered that the PSA database was contaminated. It also pointed out that there were officials of the PSA who were friends with certain companies in the PSA database. Those officials were to be disciplined by the applicant, as the implementer of the FFS Report, arising from the FFS Report. He also stated that a precedent was set by the Board when HR Ignite, a company not on the PSA database, was used when he was recruited for the position of the General Manager and when the PSA Board, again, used Godisanang Recruitment, a company not on the PSA database, to fill the General Manager position which had become vacant after his dismissal.
Shiburi testified that there were two databases at the PSA. One was for the PSA Administration and the other was for the PSA Board. The latter was formulated out of a Request for quotation process. However, Snyman testified that he did not know how many databases the PSA had for the procurement of goods and services. He stated that if the Board required legal services, it went on a request for quotations and resolved to have three legal firms which it would use for a 3-year period. He did not recall the PSA Board calling that a Board database. Mntwini, on the other hand, testified that the PSA Board agreed on three legal firms to use and that it was not necessarily a database as they could use any other firm outside of the three as they did when they engaged Fundudzi Forensic Services. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1003
Shiburi testified that if the applicant was to use Lesele Consulting, he had to seek approval for deviation from the Board. He also stated that there is no provision in the PSA Statute for such deviation but that it may either be found in the Recruitment Policy or it was catered for in the EE Transformation Policy. Shiburi failed to produce any policy containing such provisions to the arbitration hearing despite being afforded the opportunity to do so.
It is mind-boggling how a company Board that still uses service providers not on the PSA database in the recruitment of senior positions would regard it as an offence when its General Manager followed the same practice when it recruited for the DGM position. It used HR Ignite when it recruited the applicant for the General Manager position and used Godisanang Recruitment when it filled the General Manager’s post that became vacant arising from the dismissal of the applicant. Snyman did not dispute that the FFS Report found the PSA database to have been contaminated to some extent though not in its entirety. In that context, it would not be untoward or not in the discretion of the most senior employee in the company not to use it. The reason by the applicant that he did not use the PSA database was sound in the light of the findings of the Fundudzi Report.
The PSA Policy provision on the use of the PSA database is applicable to all employees and the Board. It cannot be irregular for the applicant not to exercise his discretion in light of the contaminated PSA database and the precedent set by the Board to go outside the PSA database for services required. Even if it is to be granted that the Board has its own database, the same Board goes out of its database as it did with the recruitment of the applicant and now his successor. If the Policy provision is to bind the applicant under all circumstances, so, it must to the Board because the Policy provides that the Policy is applicable to all employees and the Board. If the latter seeks to have the Policy provisions to be applicable to itself and the PSA administration irrespective of circumstances, it must break clean with the past and communicate that from now henceforth the provision in question shall be implemented without any exception for both the Board and the PSA administration in the procurement of goods and services.
I cannot agree with Advocate Millard that the applicant had to implement the FFS Report only in relation to the disciplining of implicated officials. The FFS Report went further to recommend the review of the procurement policy and found the PSa database to have been compromised in that certain officials were friends with certain companies in the database and that there was collusion in the procurement of goods and services between PSA officials and owners of companies in the database. In his implementation of the FFS Report, the applicant would also be expected to initiate processes of reviewing the procurement policy and the PSA database.
It also absurd that I must only be limited to the actions of the applicant devoid of that of the Board in establishing practices within the institution. Rules and practices within workplaces are important. There may not be specific rules on certain issues but practice may be extant in terms of regulating conduct within the workplace. The circumstances are important  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1004
  and it will be a mechanical approach to an enquiry of this nature to restrict the enquiry to only whether the applicant sourced a service provider from the PSA database or not without looking at the circumstances under which he went outside the PSA database. The circumstances may excuse his actions or not.
For the reasons advanced by the applicant as alluded to above, I find that his decision to source service providers outside the PSA database as necessary under the circumstances in which the database was found by the FFS Report to have been compromised and/or contaminated.
Parties have also sought to adduce testimony and have included in their arguments the issue of deviation using the provisions of the Policy on financial delegation of authority. This was with the aim of showing whether there was a deviation or not which had to be approved by the Board. Financial delegation of authority is the assignment to post-holders of responsibility and accountability for specific roles and tasks. Approval limits specify the value up to which a post-holder may authorise transactions falling within the scope of their delegated authorities. This charge does not concern financial delegation of authority. The applicant was not charged with approving purchases over and above his financial limit as delegated. The charge is simply about using a service provider not on the PSA database. Lesele Consulting’s services amounted to R320 000 which was within his financial delegated authority.
I, accordingly, find that the applicant cannot be found to have committed an offence when he sourced Lesele Consulting for the recruitment of the DGM position.

Were quotations sourced as required by the Procurement Policy when Lesele Consulting was ultimately appointed?
The evidence by Shiburi was that the quotations were not sourced from service providers in the PSA database. He did not lead any evidence to the effect that there were no quotations sourced leading to the appointment of Lesele Consulting by the applicant. Madeleine testified that she did not have personal knowledge of the appointment of Lesele Consulting and was not aware of the emails between the applicant and his personal assistant, Nthabiseng Ngoepe. She could not confirm anything concerning the sourcing and recommendation process followed in appointing Lesele Consulting. On the other hand, the applicant testified that Nthabiseng had sourced quotations as per A370-497 emails between Nthabiseng and potential service providers requesting quotations.
The respondent bears the onus to prove that quotations were not sourced and, therefore, in the absence of any evidence proving that quotations were not sourced, I hold that the respondent has failed to discharge its onus to prove. The applicant has testified on the sourcing of quotations by Nthabiseng and has shown email correspondence between Nthabiseng and the potential service providers where she was sourcing quotations that ultimately led to the appointment of Lesele Consulting. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1005
The second charge preferred against the applicant and for which the applicant was dismissed concerned his alleged failure and/or refusal to comply with an instruction from the Board given on 20 May 2022 to provide the Board with all information relating to the procurement of Lesele Consulting to assist with the recruitment of the DGM; disclosing all deviations from the Procurement Policy and Recruitment and Selection Policy; and suspending with immediate effect the recruitment process pending the board’s discussions on the information to be provided by him.

Was there a Board Resolution the applicant had to comply with?
The evidence led by Shiburi in agreement with the applicant’s testimony and that of Mntwini was that a duly-constituted meeting of the Board took place on 19 May 2022 in which the applicant appraised the Board of the recruitment process for the DGM position. Their testimonies are also in agreement that this was an information-sharing exercise with the Board and that the Board resolved it as being “for noting”. Shiburi testified that decisions of the Board are taken in the physical meetings of the Board through resolutions. If no decision had been taken in the physical meeting, decisions may be taken on a round robin meeting taking place electronically. It was also Shiburi’s evidence that directors Snyman, Silinyani and Seipati recused themselves because they were applicants for the DGM position.
Shiburi further testified that they were not satisfied with the response by the applicant who said that he was not going to use the internal HR for recruitment on the basis that he wanted to protect the credibility of the process. HR Policy was clear that HR personnel had to be involved in the process and Lesele Consulting was not on the PSa database. The applicant had also said something referring to the FFS Report and wanting to protect the credibility of the process by not using the PSA database. He, Shiburi, personally said that the purpose of the appraisal was to get more information and then for the Board to deliberate on the information after excusing the applicant.
He had, on 20 May 2022, dropped an email to the Board members excluding those that declared their conflict. As per the resolution of the meeting of 20 May 2022 the resolution as per R1 page 113 resolved “The vice-chairperson expressed appreciation to the GM for appraising the Board and confirmed that the item was for noting”. When there was a tie in terms of votes on the Board instructing the applicant in terms of charge 2, the chairperson of the meeting exercised a casting vote allowing the motion to carry and thus the resolution. The applicant did not suspend the recruitment process and did not provide the information as instructed. Another meeting on a round robin basis was held which resolved to suspend the applicant.
He testified that matters reserved for round robin are those that are urgent and the next ordinary meeting of the Board was scheduled for July 2022. Snyman testified that he chaired the Board meeting of 19 May 2022. He declared conflict of interest on the item of the filling of the DGM position because he had applied for that position. He could not recall that he was 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1006
  part of the Board meeting that resolved to suspend the applicant. He later got to know that the applicant was suspended on 8 June 2022 through a PSA circular, learned of the suspension from employees in the PSA administration and later from Board President, Mulaudzi. He learned of the alleged misconduct by the applicant between 20 and 26 June 2022 when he saw the charge sheet served on the applicant.
On the other hand, the applicant testified that he was not grossly insubordinate as alleged in this charge as he had accounted to the Board on the matter in the meeting of 19 May 2022, was thanked by the Board and the matter resolved as being for noting. There was never such a thing that a matter had been noted by the Board and subsequently a round robin convened to deal with the same matter. The round robin was unlawful and he can, therefore, not be held to have been insubordinate. He had requested a Board resolution on the instruction and when it was not provided he cannot be held to have failed to comply with a Board instruction. In terms of the Companies Act on round robin, a letter should be sent to all Board directors and whoever of the latter feels that he or she is conflicted, will on him or herself declare his/her conflict. Silinyani withdrew her application for the position but she was excluded from the round robin.
The critical question as regards this charge is whether there was a lawful and reasonable instruction issued by the Board to the applicant which he had failed or refused to comply with. The lawfulness of the instruction in this circumstance related to the source of the instruction. The question being whether there was a validly constituted PSA Board meeting that took a valid resolution to issue an instruction to the applicant expecting such an instruction to be complied with.
It became apparent as it will be seen later in this award on the events of the alleged assault that the PSA Board was divided. This will be evident from the letters that were issued to the applicant signed by Mntwini purporting to be from the PSA Board uplifting the suspension of the applicant as well as reinstating Sebati to the position of DGM that he was appointed into having been rescinded by the other part of the Board led by Mulaudzi. It is important to show this because the applicant is alleged to have failed and/or refused to comply with a Board’s instruction. The question becomes whether the instruction was from the PSA Board which the applicant was obliged to comply with.
It is pretty clear that the alleged instruction was not from a PSA Board as elected by its electorate. It was a decision of the disgruntled faction of the PSA Board which did not have its way on the issue of the process of the recruitment of the DGM position presented by the applicant on 19 May 2022. I find in this manner because the duly constituted meeting of the PSA Board held on 19 May 2022 resolved the issue as being one for noting. The only reason that this matter re-emerged on the next day was as Shiburi put it: “We were not satisfied with the response given by the GM. He had said he was not going to use the internal HR for recruitment reasoning that he wanted to protect the credibility of the process…” It is my reading of “We” to refer to Shiburi and those members of the PSA Board who supported the round robin and its decision to instruct the applicant as it did. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1007
The applicant testified that the round robin was unlawful. Section 73(4)(b) of the Companies Act of 2008 provides that no meeting of a Board may be convened without notice to all of the directors, subject to subsection (5). Subsection (5) provides that except to the extent that the company’s memorandum of incorporation provides otherwise – (a) if all of the directors of the company – (i) acknowledge actual receipt of the notice; (ii) are present at a meeting; or (iii) waive notice of the meeting, the meeting may proceed even if the company failed to give the required notice of that meeting, or there is a defect in the giving of the notice. A majority of the directors must be present at a meeting before a vote may be called at a meeting of directors; (c) each director has one vote on a matter before the Board. (d) a majority of the votes cast on a resolution is sufficient to approve that resolution; and (e) in the case of a tied vote- (i) the chair may cast a deciding vote if the chair did not initially have or cast a vote; or (ii) the matter being voted on fails, in any other case.
It is to be noted that the purported round robin of 20 May 2022 convened as a board meeting was convened without notice to all of the directors. This ran against the dictates of section 73(4)(b) as stated above stating that no board meeting may be convened without notice to all of the directors. There was merely an email by Shiburi and no notice of meeting was given. Accordingly, the issue of the directors acknowledging the actual receipt of the notice does not arise because no notice was given. Furthermore, the section provides that each director has one vote on a matter before the Board and that in the case of a tied vote, the chair may cast a deciding vote if the chair did not initially have or cast a vote. In the round robin, the chair initially cast his vote and when it was a tied vote, he cast a deciding vote. This is against the governance provisions of the Companies Act.
In these circumstances, the applicant’s contention must succeed that the round robin was unlawful and that it could not have produced a lawful resolution in terms of which he would have been obliged to comply with. Therefore, he cannot be held to have been grossly insubordinate as the instruction was not from a valid Board meeting. The instruction was not lawful and was unreasonable in that it was not from a validly convened PSA Board meeting. I do not agree with Advocate Millard’s argument that it would have made no sense to copy in Board members on an item that they had recused themselves from discussing the previous day. The Companies Act makes it mandatory for such a notice to be given to all directors. It is up to those directors to then declare their conflict, if any. Due to the failure to provide notice to each director, the round robin resolution concerning the recruitment process was invalid. I agree with Mr Ntshaba that Mulaudzi’s letter claiming a Board resolution misrepresented the authority of the PSA Board and its decision-making process and that such misrepresentation cannot form the basis for a charge of gross insubordination against the applicant. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1008
I accordingly find that the applicant did not exhibit any conduct of being grossly insubordinate in this regard.

Did the applicant cause PSA to incur irregular expenditure and place the PSA at risk of being put into disrepute and exposing it to labour disputes?
The third charge was that of allegedly causing the PSA to incur irregular expenditure in the amount of R320 000 as a consequence of the appointment of Lesele Consulting and placing the PSA at risk of being put into disrepute and exposing it to labour disputes. However, the respondent never led any evidence to prove the irregularity of the expenditure as well as any act in that regard that stood to put PSA into disrepute and expose it to labour disputes. In the absence of such evidence, I cannot find that the applicant had occasioned the incurring of irregular expenditure for the PSA, putting it into disrepute or exposing it to labour disputes.

Did the applicant commit an act of assault for which he had to be dismissed?
The final charge for which the applicant was also found guilty and dismissed is that of alleged assault on 20 July 2022 in which he is alleged to have assaulted Mulaudzi. Adri testified on what she had seen when on a smoke break on the day in question. She testified that as she turned she had seen the applicant hit Mulaudzi. She had also testified that she did not see the incident, on the same day, when Mulaudzi assaulted the applicant. The applicant hit Mulaudzi again (evidence not corroborated by the video evidence). (The first video clip showed the applicant following Mulaudzi to his car, upon reaching the car door and appearing to be holding it, Mulaudzi alighted and started assaulting the applicant while he backpaddled until he fell to the ground and Mulaudzi continuing to hit him as police tried to intervene).
On the other hand, the applicant testified that Mulaudzi had brought police to arrest him. When he asked him why he had to be arrested, Mulaudzi walked to his car and he had followed him. At reaching his car, he had tried to open it. Mulaudzi then referred to him as a young boy and that he was going to beat him up (“I am going to moer you”). Mulaudzi had then thrown punches at him while he backtracked as it could be seen on the video clip. One of the punches floored him and Mulaudzi had continued throwing punches at him while he lay on the ground until the police pulled him away towards the PSA gate. While the police talked to Mulaudzi at the gate, Mulaudzi continued to insult him. When Mulaudzi said to him that he was going to show him his mother (“Ke satlo go bontsha Mmago”) he had lost it and punched him. Mulaudzi had started it and had provoked him through insults. 
He had a toxic relationship with Mulaudzi leading up to the event of the day in question. Mulaudzi had never referred to him as a General Manager but by name even in formal meetings despite others calling him a General Manager. He used to call him a young man or boy. He had contested the General Manager position with him and Shiburi and that has never sat well with him from then. 
Sebati also testified that he was present on 20 July 2022 and he had seen the applicant following Mulaudzi to his car asking why he wanted the 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1009
  police to arrest him. He also saw Mulaudzi assaulting the applicant as it could be seen from the video clip. He also testified that Mulaudzi had insulted the applicant’s mother at the PSA gate whereafter the applicant hit him.
Assault occurs when one person intentionally and unlawfully causes physical harm or injury to another. It includes threats or attempts to cause bodily harm. It is clearly evident in the video footage shown in the proceedings that the applicant punched Mulaudzi. It is also clear that Mulaudzi was the first person to assault the applicant as it could be seen from the video clip covering the first interaction of the parties on that day. The applicant did not dispute that he punched Mulaudzi. However, he stated that it was as a consequence of provocation coming from Mulaudzi who insulted his mother.
The respondent bears the onus to prove the offence of assault. It had to lead evidence to show that the act of assault was intentional and unlawful on the part of the applicant and that nothing justified the applicant’s actions in that regard. The respondent denied us the opportunity of hearing Mulaudzi’s account of the events that unfolded on that day. Had he testified, he would have shed light on what I should make of the applicant’s actions on that day. He would have assisted the proceedings in the determination of whether the applicant’s defence of provocation carries weight or not. I do not have the benefit of his evidence and I am left with the evidence of the applicant and Sebati to make findings on this charge.
It is held that provocation does not constitute a defence to a charge of assault and others like murder. However, it can be argued to play as a mitigating factor to reduce the severity of a crime. The courts consider emotions justified by provocation as a mitigating factor when it comes to sentencing. Provocation is best described as an act whereby a person acts out of anger due to being taunted by another person, ultimately resulting in retaliation for the taunting. It is often referred to as “temporary loss of control” due to being taunted by another person. Provocation may consist of words or actions or a combination of both. It examines whether the accused person intended to commit an unlawful act but acted impulsively due to an abrupt surge of emotions.
The applicant has pleaded provocation regarding the assault on 20 July 2022 and the respondent did not lead evidence from Mulaudzi to give the proceedings account of what led to the assault. I am left with one side of the story and I have no reason to disbelieve the version of the applicant that he was provoked. It is not denied that Mulaudzi was the first to assault the applicant and that Mulaudzi had continued to insult the applicant even after he had assaulted him as seen in the first video clip. The version of the applicant is corroborated by that of Sebati that the applicant had punched Mulaudzi arising out of his mother being insulted. There is no evidence suggesting that the applicant had started this fight. The video footage showing him following Mulaudzi to his car did not show someone who was belligerent. It is Mulaudzi that started the assault as can be seen from the first video clip of the events on that day. 
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1010
In the circumstances, I find that the applicant’s plea for provocation must succeed. The applicant did not intend to commit an unlawful act but had acted impulsively due to an abrupt surge of emotions occasioned by the insults from Mulaudzi. Mulaudzi’s insults to the applicant had persisted despite Mulaudzi having assaulted the applicant without the applicant retaliating. It had taken the police intervention for Mulaudzi to cease his assault on the applicant. What further puts the action of Mulaudzi in the spotlight is that he had started the assault of the applicant in the presence of police. It does not make it far-fetched that he could have insulted the applicant if he was able to assault him in the presence of the police without any fear of being arrested.
I, accordingly, find that the act of the applicant in punching Mulaudzi is mitigated by the fact that Mulaudzi had provoked him. This renders his dismissal inappropriate on account of his action in this regard. I agree with Mr. Ntshaba that it was only after enduring physical assault and degrading insults from Mulaudzi that the applicant lost his temper and reacted. His reaction was a human response to extreme provocation. The applicant’s response was not premediated but a reflex to an ongoing physical and verbal attack.
Based on the foregoing, I find the dismissal of the applicant to have been substantively unfair.
I now turn to deal with the procedural unfairness challenge. The applicant contended that his dismissal was unfair because a disciplinary hearing against him was held and concluded in his absence. Just like in the alleged assault charge, the respondent led no evidence to prove that it was fair for the chairperson of the disciplinary hearing to conclude the disciplinary hearing in the absence of the applicant. All that the respondent did was to cross-examine the applicant on this aspect. As a result, there was no evidence from any witness secured by the respondent to prove that to continue and conclude the disciplinary hearing in the absence of the applicant was justified.
The applicant testified that the hearing chairperson proceeded with the hearing in his absence when he knew that he was not well. A 549 was a medical certificate from Dr Kulubu – a Specialist Psychiatrist stating that he was admitted at Louis Pasteur hospital from 11/10/22 until 30/10/22. The medical certificate stated that he was not fit to attend any hearing until further notice.
There was an application for postponement by the former attorneys of record of the applicant requesting a postponement based on the applicant’s ill-health and that the attorneys were not available on the scheduled dates.
I do not intend to elevate the respondent’s arguments to the level of evidence. Arguments support evidence that has been led and are not evidence on themselves. There was no evidence led by the respondent to show that the chairperson was justified to proceed in the absence of the applicant and his legal representative. The latter had requested a postponement on the stated grounds. This arbitration required the person who  
[2024] 9 BALR 997 (CCMA) at 1011
  decided to proceed with the disciplinary hearing to show that he was justified and being fair in doing so. He was not secured to lead that evidence and therefore his reasons for proceeding with the disciplinary hearing in the absence of the applicant are unknown. It is the chairperson who took the decision to proceed that must lead evidence and not the arguments of Advocate Millard.
I hold that the respondent has failed to discharge the onus to prove that the decision to proceed with the disciplinary hearing in the absence of the applicant was fair. Therefore, the applicant’s dismissal was also procedurally unfair as he was denied an opportunity to tell his side of the story. 

Remedy
The dismissal of the applicant is held to have been procedurally and substantively unfair. He has sought relief in the form of retrospective reinstatement. In light of my findings and in the absence of any evidence to the effect that it will be impractical to afford the applicant the primary remedy of reinstatement, I am obliged to comply with his wishes for retrospective reinstatement.

Award
The dismissal of the applicant is held to have been procedurally and substantively unfair.
The respondent is ordered to reinstate the applicant into the same or similar position he held prior to his dismissal without any loss of pay and benefits.
The applicant is to report for duty on 2 July 2024 at 9am at the PSA Offices where he worked as at the time of his dismissal.
As a result of the retrospective reinstatement order, the respondent is ordered to pay backpay to the applicant amounting to R5 355 967,45. This amount is to be paid into the applicant’s bank account as known or as shall be communicated to the respondent by the applicant. This amount shall be paid to the applicant by no later than 28 June 2024.
The amount in clause 66 of this award shall attract interest at the rate of 15.5% if it is paid on any other date after 28 June 2024.

No cases were referred to in the above award.



End of Document