



National Transport Movement obo Members / Itumele Buslines (Pty) Ltd t/a Interstate Buslines [2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: South African Road Passenger Bargaining Council
Case No: RPNT2056; RPNT2083
Date: 15/07/2014
Before: CL Dickens, Panellist
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practice — Benefits — Employer withholding payment of annual bonus from employees who participated in protected strike — Non-payment of bonus constituting unfair labour practice.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant employees all took part in a protected strike in April and May 2013. The respondent refused to pay them incentive bonuses for the period December to May of that year. Employees who did not participate in the strike were paid their bonuses, and also received a once-off ex gratia payment of R1 000. The applicants contended that the denial of these benefits constituted an unfair labour practice. The respondent contended that there had been no need for these employees to strike, that it had merely applied its incentive scheme policy and that, insofar as the applicants alleged that they had been discriminated against, the council lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate the matter.

Having ruled that the council had jurisdiction, the Commissioner noted the respondent’s incentive scheme provided expressly that if employees participated in a strike that caused the company financial loss, the company could not only recover the loss from those employees, but also reduce their bonus proportionately, or cancel the scheme. The only criterion used to differentiate between those employees who received bonuses and those who did not was whether or not they participated in the strike. This meant that those who were refused bonuses were being punished for exercising their constitutional right to strike. If, as the respondent claimed, it had suffered severe financial loss, it should have reduced the bonuses of all employees. However, the ex gratia payment did not constitute a reward for not striking, but rather compensation for travel and other costs incurred by the non-strikers while working during the strike. There was no reason why workers who did not tender service during the strike should have also received that amount.

The Commissioner declared that the withholding of incentive bonuses from the applicant employees constituted an unfair labour practice, and ordered the respondent to pay them the amounts due to them.

 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1186

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

[1]    Details of hearing and representation

The arbitration proceedings in the above matter of NTM obo 50 members, was scheduled for 13 May 2014 at the Offices of Interstate Bus Lines, 246 Church Street, Hamilton, Bloemfontein. An application for Joinder was proposed, and a Joinder Agreement was signed. The second applicant was joined to the proceedings, due to the fact that the cases are similar in nature.
The arbitration was then scheduled for 26 June 2014.
The first applicants were represented by Mr Mokokoane, an Official of NTM. The second applicants were represented by Mr Nebisi, an Official of SATAWU. The parties agreed that Mr Nebisi would lead the evidence and that, if Mr Mokokoane wanted to add to the questioning, he would be entitled to do so.
The respondent, Itumele Buslines (Pty) Ltd t/a Interstate Bus Lines, was represented by Mrs Bloem, an attorney from Martie Bloem Attorneys.
The parties requested to file written closing arguments by 3 July 2014.

[2]    Issue in dispute

The dispute which has been referred to the Bargaining Council as an unfair labour practice relating to the provision of benefits. The Commissioner is required to determine whether the respondent’s conduct was unfair when they refused to pay the applicants’ incentive scheme bonuses as a result of their participation in a protected strike during 2013.
The Commissioner is further required to determine whether the respondent was unfair when they paid all non-striking employees a once off bonus of R1 000 (one thousand rand).

[3]    Background of the dispute

A protected strike took place from 19 April 2013 until 15 May 2013.
All the applicants in this matter took part in the protected strike.
All employees who did not participate in the protected strike were paid their incentive bonuses for the period December 2012 until May 2013.
All the applicants did not receive payment of their incentive bonuses for the period December 2012 until May 2013. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1187

[4]    Survey of arguments and evidence

Submissions on behalf of the applicants
I wish to state from the outset, that not all evidence presented will be set out hereunder. Only a summary of the evidence is contained herein.
The following witnesses testified on behalf of the applicants:

Majoro Nyaphuli

Mr Nyaphuli testified that he is familiar with the Incentive Bonus Policy which the company is paying employees. The bonus is calculated on the percentage which the employee obtains. If an employee is absent from work for a day then 30 (thirty) points are deducted. This does not apply with annual leave.
He confirmed that the incentive bonus is performance based and that if someone is not at work then they cannot accumulate more points than someone who was at work.
He held that Mr N Qometa was dismissed for misconduct. When the employee was reinstated she was paid an incentive bonus. This was unfair as she was not even at work and could not have accumulated 24 (twenty four) points.
He testified that in October 2012 there was an unprotected strike at the company, and in January 2013 a portion of the incentive bonus was paid to the employees. He held that the conduct of the respondent was unfair as in this case it was a protected strike and the incentive bonuses were not paid.
He confirmed that there was no work which took place during the period that the respondent applied the lock out, and that 30 (thirty) points should have been deducted for each day that the employees did not report for duty. He stated that the respondent’s conduct was unfair in that they applied the policy selectively. The respondent failed to follow their own Policy.
He confirmed that the policy states that if the strike causes the company to suffer financial losses, that no incentive bonuses will be paid. He agreed that the company did suffer financial losses as the buses were not operating.
He testified that the company paid R1 000 (one thousand rand) to each employee who worked during the strike. He held that in his view this 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1188
  was the company’s way of saying thank you to the workers for not participating in the strike.
He stated that the respondent’s actions were a way of trying to convince the workers not to go on strike. It was an incentive for them to come to work. In his view it was a way that the respondent was bribing the staff to come to work and not to exercise their constitutional right to strike.
He confirmed that Tirisano were not part of the national negotiations, but that SATAWU and NTM were. In his view it is not normal for unions to leave the national negotiating forum and attempt to settle a dispute with the employees themselves. He stated that this is not in line with the SARPBAC Constitution.
During the 2012 strike the workers demanded an increase of R2 500 (two thousand five hundred rand). The company was not prepared to negotiate with them and stated that such negotiations must take place at a national level.
He held that there was no justification for the Employer to reward non-striking workers.
Under cross-examination, he testified that if the Incentive Policy of the respondent was applied consistently then it would be fair.
He stated that he does not know what award was made when Qometa was reinstated at work. He could not deny that the award read that she must be reinstated with back-pay and no loss of benefits. He stated that if she was absent from work then she would have lost points and would not have been entitled to the incentive benefits. He stated that he could not disagree if the Award said that the employee must be reinstated, and that this meant that the person should be placed back at work as if she were never gone.
He testified that after the strike in 2012, they were paid their incentive bonuses according to the points which they had for the year. He did not know what percentage amount was deducted from their bonus after the unprotected strike, but confirmed that the full amount was not paid.
He held that he was never shown the proof of the actual loss suffered by the company after the strike, therefore he could not confirm that it was 6 (six) million rand. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1189
He confirmed that the Policy does give the respondent the discretion to decrease the incentive bonus or not to pay it at all.
He confirmed that the company buses were not operational during the strike and that he was not at the meeting where the respondent spoke to the workers regarding the R1 000 (one thousand rand) bonus.
He confirmed that a meeting took place between Management and all employees at the Botshabelo Depot. Prior to this, Management communicated to them where they stood at the Bargaining Council in relation to the wage increases. He confirmed that during a meeting Management told all the employees that if they participate in the national strike that they will lose their incentive bonus. If they continue to work their incentive bonuses will be paid out to them.
He confirmed that from 22 till 25 April 2013 all operations were normal. From the 26th the buses were not operational again. The only people who continued working then were members of Tirisano. From 30 April 2013, the respondent then locked out all employees.
He confirmed that the public did suffer as a result of the strike, but others used taxis and other means of transport.
He testified that the effect of a strike does not take away the workers’ right to strike. He stated that it was the duty of the Union to give them feedback as to what was agreed at the National Bargaining Council and was not the right or duty of Management to reach an agreement with the workers.
Mr Nebisi argued that selective payment of incentive bonuses and paying of R1 000 (one thousand rand) was made to employees who the company claimed did not participate in the national strike which started on 19 April 2013 till 13 May 2013.
Mr Nebisi argued that Mr Nyaphuli testified that the Scheme is performance based and is divided into 2 (two) payments. The first period is from December to May month, and payments are made in July month. The second period is from June to November, and payments are made in January month. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1190
Mr Nebisi argued that the company applied its Policy unfairly when they paid certain groups of employees which belonged to Tirisano Union, and failed to pay SATAWU and NTM members. In terms of the Incentive Scheme Policy it is clear that the strike negatively impacted the company, that if the loss were huge as the company claims of plus minus 9 (nine) million rand, the question arises as to why they paid certain employees and did not cancel the payment completely.
He argued that when their members went on strike, they already worked for the term starting from December 2012 until 19 April 2013 when the strike started. At the time of the strike these employees had already accumulated a lot of points which could have made the employer to pay them pro rata instead of paying them nothing.
He held that if the company claimed that there were huge losses, they should have cancelled the payment to everybody, and not selectively paid certain employees.
He argued that if one reads page 3 of Bundle “B”, this provides a fair means to determine terms of payment for those who did not work their shift fully. He argued that that is where they say that an unfair labour practice was committed by the employer relating to the provision of benefits.
He argued that it is their case that the company did not follow its Policy when incentive payments were made. He held that employees were entitled to these payments.
He argued that it is their submission that the Company also acted inconsistently by paying Qometa who was absent for 5 (five) months, and failed to pay those who worked. It is their case that the reasons forwarded by the employer for not paying their members incentive bonuses was not convincing, and according to them amounted to an unfair labour practice.
He argued that the relief that is sought is that the Company must pay their members a pro-rata bonus in terms of the Incentive Scheme Policy.
Mr Nebisi argued that the Company breached Chapter 11, section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act on freedom of association. In the meetings 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1191
  that the respondent held with the employees during the strike, they told them that if they continue with the strike they are going to lose their incentive bonuses.
He argued that it was clear that they were using the incentive bonus in exchange for the employees not to exercise their rights conferred by the Labour Relations Act. They tried to convince the employees not to participate in any proceedings in terms of this Act.
It was also put to the respondent’s witness that on 4 October 2012 there was an illegal strike for a period of 6 (six) days where buses were all stopped. Incentive bonuses were paid to all drivers, but after a legal strike they selectively paid employees. Their response was not convincing. The policy does not give them an option to pay certain groups and not to pay other groups.
Mr Nebisi held that they do not agree with the issue of the 2012 strike that the damages was not huge compared to the 2013 strike. He stated that if there was a huge loss as claimed, they were not provided with any evidence to prove this. He argued that the fact that they paid incentive bonuses and also R1 000 (one thousand rand) to those employees according to them defeats the whole claim they mentioned as huge losses, hence then that the Policy was not followed or was not consistently applied. He argued that the employees should be paid pro-rata incentive bonuses as they believe that the employer failed to discharge the onus of proof that its conduct by not paying its employees was fair.
He argued that in terms of section 5(1) and section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act, no person may discriminate against an employee for exercising any rights conferred by the Labour Relations Act. He further stated that in terms of section 5(3) no person may take advantage, or promise to take advantage, of employees seeking employment, for that person not exercising any right conferred by this Act for not participating in terms of this Act.
He argued that section 10 of the Act provides that any party who alleges that a right or protection conferred by Chapter II has been infringed must prove the fact of the conduct. He argued that they are going to prove that the respondent 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1192
  has infringed rights of their members for protection of their members confirmed by Chapter II of the Act.
He argued that on 19 April 2013 until 13 May 2013 their members embarked on a protected strike which was a national strike. The strike ended on 13 May 2013 when the parties agreed on the percentage increase and other working conditions, the agreement on the wage increase was 9.5% back dated from 1 April 2013 and 0.5% in July 2013, the total increase was 10%. In May 2013, those employees who did not participate in the strike received a R1 000 (one thousand rand) each from the respondent as a once-off bonus according to Mr Du Plessis. He argued that they are challenging this payment as an infringement of section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act, as according to Mr Du Plessis served as a reward for not participating in the strike.
He argued that it is their case that this payment was intended to unfairly discriminate against the employees who participate in the strike, or even disregarding their right to strike, this has resulted or created tension between the respondent and the applicants exercising their rights in terms of the Act.
He submitted that the respondent contravened section 5(1) and/or section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act by paying a R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers. The effect of the payment of R1 000 (one thousand rand) was to reward those who did not participate in the strike and for penalising those who did.
He submitted that the conduct of the employer did not only discriminate between strikers and not strikers, but that it was unfair, unjustified and done for ulterior purposes for employees not participating in the strike in future.
He stated that they are saying in regards to section 5(3) that the respondent, by paying a R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers, gave them an advantage, meaning a benefit bonus for added extra as Mr Du Plessis confirmed in his testimony, and this advantage was given to each of the non-strikers in exchange for them not to exercise their right to strike contained in section 64 of the Act. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1193
He stated that this is supported by the fact that the respondent paid a R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers and not to employees who participated in the strike. It is a known fact that applicants who belonged to SATAWU and NTM were locked in a wage dispute and the strike was the result of a deadlock.
In conclusion, he stated that there are no conditions of employment prevailing that the respondent Company nor is there a practice that employees are remunerated for work done over and above the normal contractual entitlement. In the context of this case the respondent deviated from its normal practice by paying R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers, and the payment will create doubt in their minds in regard to their future participation in a strike.
He referred to the matter of FAWU and another v Pets Products (Pty) Ltd [2000] 7 BLLR 781 (LC), where the Court held that a bonus awarded to employees who did not participate in a protected strike was a breach of section 5(1) and (3) of the Act. The employer claimed that it was a gratuity in return for work done during strike, and this was insufficient to prove the fairness of differential treatment.
He further referred to Nkutha and others v Fuel Gas Installation (Pty) Ltd [2000] 2 BLLR 178 (LC) at 182, where the Court found that the employer committed an unfair labour practice by discriminating against the strikers for exercising their rights to strike conferred by the Act and by so doing the respondent infringed section 5(1) and (3) of the Act by paying R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers in May 2013. The right to strike is an agreement which regulates the issue. There can be no justification on the side of the employer for giving bonuses of R1 000 (one thousand rand) to non-strikers because they limit their statutory right to strike.
He requested that the respondent must compensate each individual equivalent to the amount paid to non-strikers (R1 000 (one thousand rand)) as they believe that, based on the above arguments and case law they referred to, the respondent’s actions were unfair, hence the request for compensation. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1194
Submissions on behalf of the respondent
I wish to state from the outset, that not all evidence presented will be set out hereunder. Only a summary of the evidence is contained herein.
The following witnesses testified on behalf of the respondent:
Johannes Christoffel du Plessis
Motebang Botsane
Mr Du Plessis testified that he is the Chief Operating Officer of Interstate Bus Lines. The protected national strike commenced on 19 April 2013. On the same day, the CEO and the COO addressed the technical/admin personnel and urged them to continue with their normal duties as the Company was prepared to offer the mediators proposal of 9%. The company further promised all employees that if the agreed wage increase at the Bargaining Council came out at a higher percentage after the strike, the Company would automatically adjust the current proposed increase to that higher percentage and if it comes out at a lower percentage than the proposed one, the Company would remain at the agreed proposed 9% wage increase.
He held that members of SATAWU agreed to the 9% wage increase during the meeting, therefore the offer was made.
The technical / admin employees promised Management that they will continue working.
On 19 April 2013, Management went to Phomolong Depot where they addressed the drivers over the same issues. While Management was busy addressing the drivers Mr Nebisi arrived at the meeting and told drivers not to listen to what Management was telling them as Management was lying about the promise they were making to the employees. This resulted in a lot of confusion amongst the drivers. They separated into their 3 (three) Unions so that they could take a decision of whether they would participate in the strike or not.
Tirisano took a decision not to participate in the strike action and SATAWU and NTM decided that they would participate. This resulted in a shortage of staff and they had to take steps to ensure that their passengers were transported to their respective destinations. All employees who 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1195
  drove a bus were promised a R100 (one hundred rand) for each and every extra trip they completed.
On 20 April 2013, there were no services rendered by the employees.
On 21 April 2013, Management called all the drivers to a meeting at Botshabelo Depot. All employees were requested to continue working whilst the wage negotiations continued. Management told all the workers that they would forfeit their entire incentive bonus if they continue with the strike. All the drivers together with their respective shop stewards took a decision to continue working until the wage negotiations were completed.
From 22 April till the morning of 25 April, the operational services were normal. SATAWU officials addressed their members and all their members together with the NTM members downed tools to participate in the strike. From 26 April 2013, services did not operate as normal. Management again addressed workers at the Botshabelo Depot and about 70 to 80 % of the shift started to operate from 12pm. Management made a commitment to pay all personnel inside the bargaining unit an amount of R1 000 (one thousand rand) for transport and any unexpected expenses. The reason for this was that the Company buses were not operational and that they would have to make their own plans to get to and from work.
As from 26 April 2013, a reduced service operated from 12pm up to the evening of the 29 April 2013 when a bus train was burned down at Botshabelo. On the 30th, Management decided to apply a lock out as the employees and passengers were placed in danger.
On 10 May 2013, a meeting was held at Botshabelo Depot at the request of Tirisano and NTM. At this meeting, it was agreed that all the employees who will resume their normal duties on 11 May 2013 will be allowed to do so while awaiting the national process to conclude an agreement. It was also agreed that the Company will implement the 9.5% wage increase as proposed by the mediator. The Company then again committed to the R1 000 (one thousand rand) compensation for employees inside the Bargaining Unit who did not participate in the strike. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1196
From 11 May 2013 until 14 May 2013, a normal service was rendered although some members of SATAWU were still participating in the strike.
On 15 May 2013, an agreement was reached at national level and as a result of the agreement the strike action ended. All employees returned to work on 17 May 2013.
He stated that the Company did apply the Policy consistently. During the 2012 unprotected strike the incentive bonuses were decreased by 50%. The policy makes provision that the bonus can be decreased or taken away in totality. During the 2013 strike the Company suffered a loss in revenue of 6 (six) million rand and a further loss of 3 (three) million rand for the bus which was burned.
Management made it clear to all employees that should they participate in the strike that they will forfeit their entire bonus. This was also confirmed via SMS to all employees.
He testified that he cannot see the reason why the employees had to go on strike. They told the employees that they guarantee an increase of 9.5% and the final increase was 10%. He stated that it does not make sense to sacrifice the incentive bonus for a further 0.5 % increase.
Mr Du Plessis testified that Qometa was reinstated with full benefits. They paid the incentive bonus as it had to be calculated as if she was at work.
He stated that Management was entitled to speak to their staff relating to where the negotiations stood at national level. 75% of their staff was not represented in the Bargaining Unit and they had to give them feedback.
Under cross-examination, he testified that a signed agreement could only be reached at national level. He denied that they were following double standards in trying to reaching an agreement with their employees within the Company, whilst there were negotiations taking place at National level. He held that they had to explain to their employees what was going on as SATAWU only represented approximately 30% of their workforce.
He denied that he wanted to influence workers not to go on strike, they were merely giving their employees feedback on the national negotiations. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1197
He held that the incentive bonus was in place since 2004, the whole scheme was based on savings and productivity, they took this into consideration and decided to pay the loyal employees who worked, the bonus. He denied that they infringed section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act. He held that it did not make sense to go on strike for 0.5% and to stand the chance to lose one’s bonus.
Mr Du Plessis testified that the R1 000 (one thousand rand) was paid to the employees to cover travelling costs as the staff buses were not operational. They did not pay them this amount to convince them not to strike as they were already working.
He confirmed that during the 2012 unprotected strike, they paid a 50% of the incentive bonus to employees, the reason for this was that their loss in revenue was far less during that strike.
He stated that he felt that it was still fair to pay those employees who worked their incentive bonuses, notwithstanding the fact that the Company suffered a huge loss during the strike.
He confirmed that all workers do have the right to strike and denied that they tried to influence them not to strike, they merely put the facts on the table.
Mr Botsane testified that he is employed as a full time shop steward of Tirisano. The level of representation of their Union is 50 plus 1. Their Union is not involved in negotiations at the Bargaining Council level.
He confirmed that Tirisano decided not to join the protected strike in 2013. They had a meeting with the shop stewards of SATAWU and NTM and they all agreed not to participate in the strike. The other Unions changed their stance and decided to join the strike without bringing them on board.
He confirmed the sequence of events as set out in the statement of Mr Du Plessis as set out in annexure “C”.
He held that they accepted the respondent’s word that they would give them an increase of 9.5 %, and the respondent further stated that if the agreed percentage was more that they would give the agreed percentage if it was more than 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1198
  the 9.5%. They were not prepared to go on strike as the respondent had given them an undertaking.
Under cross-examination, he testified that SATAWU as a national union could agree at national level not to participate. They could also make an agreement at the Company level, if they did not wish to participate.
In his previous Union they often took a decision to abandon negotiations at National Level and arrived at their own agreement with the Company. He confirmed that a National agreement could never be signed at Company level.
He confirmed that after the Unions reached an agreement regarding the strike, the operations at the respondent were 100%. After this when SATAWU and NTM decided to go on the strike, they were angry that they breached the agreement and did not bring them on board that they had changed their minds.
He testified that SATAWU did agree not to participate in the strike and that proof thereof was that all members continued working after the national strike was declared. They all agreed with Management that they would work as they were not prepared to strike over 0.5 %.
Mr Botsane testified that Management made it clear to them that those who participate in the National Strike will not receive their incentive bonuses. He stated that he did not want to give his personal opinion as to whether the respondent was fair in withholding the incentive bonuses under the circumstances.
Mrs Bloem held in argument that the question to be decided concerns the payment by the respondent of incentive bonuses in terms of the respondent’s Incentive Scheme Policy and Procedure to all employees who did not take part in the national protected strike, which commenced on 19 April 2013 and ended on 15 May 2013. The applicants contend that this payment constitutes an unfair labour practice relating to benefits in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Act. The dispute further concerns the payment by the respondent of R1 000 (one thousand rand) to all non-striking employees during the same period. The applicants also with regard to 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1199
  this payment contends that the payment constitutes an unfair labour practice relating to benefits in terms of the same section.
She argued that during the opening statements and evidence presented during the hearing, it became apparent that the applicants actually contend that the respondent’s conduct amounted to a contravention of section 5(1) and section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act.
She argued that it is respectfully submitted that this Council does not have the necessary jurisdiction to decide on the question of discrimination in terms of section 5 and that such disputes had to be referred to the Labour Court in terms of section 9(1) of the Labour Relations Act.
She argued that section 186(2) relating to an unfair labour practice makes reference of the word “unfair” several times in the definition.
She held that in this dispute it is common cause that there has been a policy regulating payments in terms of the respondent’s Incentive Scheme, that the policy had been in practice for a long time and that everybody was aware of the Policy and its contents.
She held that it was further acceded to during the hearing that the Policy would be fair if it was consistently applied by the respondent.
She argued that the respondent showed good cause for the existence of the policy as well as clause 6 thereof. The policy enables employees to become entitled to part of a 14th cheque if they contribute to the productivity and sustainability of the Company by first of all attending work and reaching objectives.
She argued that the respondent does not merely sustain financial losses during strikes by employees, but it has a negative and extreme impact on the rest of the community that approximately 20 000 (twenty thousand) people who have attended work and school in Bloemfontein do not have any other means of transport.
She argued that they sufficiently explained that it has discretion in terms of the policy to reduce striking employees’ incentive payments with 50%, further decrease it or completely cancel the Scheme, and that it exercises this discretion on the basis of financial losses incurred during a particular strike. The example of the difference 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1200
  in decrease of incentive payments between the strike of October 2012 and April 2013 is therefore indicative of the fairness of this clause and the interpretation thereof, and does not amount to unfairness or inconsistent application of the Policy as alleged by the applicants.
She further referred to the issue of Qometa who was not at work for 5 (five) months and still received payment of her incentive bonus. The employee in question was dismissed from the employ of the respondent on 27 November 2012, and was retrospectively reinstated by the CCMA on 28 March 2013. An employer who is ordered to reinstate an employee must take the employee back in employment in the same position and restore the contractual relationship that applied to the employee prior to dismissal. She held that the respondent was therefore correct in considering her as employed and at work during the time she was found to have been unfairly dismissed. Uninterrupted service, as if she was never dismissed.
She argued that the Commissioner is, therefore, requested to find that the respondent’s Incentive Scheme Policy and Procedure was fair and consistently applied and that the decision not to make payments in terms thereof to striking employees does not amount to an unfair labour practice.
With relation to the R1 000 (one thousand rand) payment, she argued that payments made to non-striking employees, that it was never put in dispute that the staff buses were not operating during the strike and that employees had to make use of their own or private taxi transport to be able to render their services. It was also not in dispute that they were intimidated by striking employees and that they could not wear their uniforms in public as a result of fear of intimidation and harm. The respondent operated for 13 (thirteen) days after some employees embarked on a strike, which means that the reimbursement per day calculated to an amount of approximately R77 (seventy seven rand) per day, which is by no means excessive considering that no further employees were travelling to and from Botshabelo with private transport and taxi’s in order to render their services. It was 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1201
  also testified to, and not contested, that the respondent only offered to reimburse employees for travel expenses after the strike had already commenced, and by no means used it to coerce employees for not taking part in the strike.
She requested the Commissioner to find that the respondent’s decision to pay R1 000 (one thousand rand) in order to reimburse non-striking employees for costs incurred during the strike, does not amount to an unfair labour practice.
She stated that should the Commissioner hold that the respondent’s conduct may have amounted to an unfair labour practice due to the provisions of section 5(1) and section 5(3) of the Labour Relations Act, the respondent requested to file supplementary arguments to address the issue of the company reaching an agreement with the employees at ground level not to strike, the Unions demand which was already acceeded to, employees’ rights not to strike, the detrimental effect of a strike on the rest of the community, limitation of constitutional rights, and the fact that the act of discrimination must involve some degree of fairness.

5.  Analysis of arguments and evidence
Mrs Bloem raised an issue in her closing arguments that if the applicants are relying on section 5(1) of the Labour Relations Act, which relates to discrimination, that the Bargaining Council does not have the jurisdiction to hear the dispute.
I wish to point out that the dispute which was referred to the Bargaining Council is an unfair labour practice dispute relating to the provision of benefits. I am required to determine whether the respondent’s conduct was unfair when they failed to pay the applicants their incentive bonuses after the protected strike in 2013, and further whether the respondent’s conduct was unfair when they paid non-striking employees a bonus of R1 000 (one thousand rand). I am not required to determine whether the respondent discriminated against the applicants. I, therefore, do have the necessary jurisdiction to hear the matter before me.
As mentioned, the dispute which has been referred to the Bargaining Council is an unfair labour practice relating to the provision of benefits. The section 186(2) reads as follows:
“(2) ‘Unfair labour practice’ means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –
unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1202

  employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;

the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.”
Incentive Scheme

“1. Aim of scheme

The aim of the scheme is to compile viable standards for employees in team context, which will be to the financial benefit of the Company and which will ensure efficient workflow, increased productivity and saving on expenses on achievement of standards.

The Company will, on the other hand, compensate the employees by offering them up to 110% of a 14th cheque based on their performance.”

Clause 2 of the policy sets out the functioning of the scheme, what the objectives are and the different weights which are attached to each objective. A sliding scale is applied to the cheque payout percentage to accommodate different levels of performance when calculating the averages per team.

“December to May with payment at the end of July of each year.

June to November with payment at the end of January of the next year.”

“6. Employees participating in a strike

If employees participate in a strike that could cause financial losses to the Company, the employees involves loose 50% of their incentive payment and the Company maintains the right to decrease their incentive payment further or to completely cancel the incentive scheme. The company reserves the right to recover the cost of a strike from the employees participating in the strike.”

It is common cause that all the applicants participated in a protected strike which commenced on 19 April 2013 and ended on 15 May 2013. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1203
It is common cause that Mr Du Plessis, the Chief Operating Officer, told all employees during a meeting, that those who elect to participate in the protected strike will not receive their incentive bonus. He also told the employees that those employees who refrain from participating in the protected strike will receive their incentive bonuses.
It is further common cause that those employees who refrained from participating in the protected strike were paid their incentive bonuses, calculated in terms of the level of performance as set out in the policy document.
It is further common cause that the applicants who participated in the protected strike did not receive their incentive bonuses, giving rise to this dispute.
In terms of the Constitution of South Africa, each employee has the right to fair labour practices. Every worker also has the right to strike. The right to strike is also set out in the Labour Relations Act, provided that the strike is a protected strike. It is common cause that the 2013 strike was a protected strike and took place on a national level.
The applicants’ dispute lies therein that they were not considered for the Incentive Scheme bonuses for the period December 2012 to May 2013, on the basis that they participated in a protected strike. Their unhappiness further lies in the fact that non-striking employees were paid their bonuses merely because they did not participate in the strike. Mr Nebisi held that if the respondent replied on section 6 of the policy, that no bonuses should have been paid to any employees for this period.
It would appear to me that the only criteria used when deciding who would be considered for an Incentive Bonus in terms of the Scheme, was whether the employee participated in the national protected strike or not.
I must find that this criteria was unfair, as the applicants were in effect being punished for exercising their right to strike as contained in the Constitution of South Africa as well as the Labour Relations Act.
I am in agreement with Mr Nebisi that if the criteria were solely that incentive bonuses would not be considered due to the financial losses suffered by the respondent as a result of the strike, then this should have been applied consistently and no incentive bonuses should have been paid out to any employees. Alternatively, all incentive bonuses should have been decreased consistently.
I can find no reasonable or fair justification for the respondent in refusing to pay the applicants’ incentive bonuses in terms of their Incentive Scheme Policy.
I, therefore, find that the respondent’s conduct was unfair in that they failed to pay the applicants their incentive bonuses for the period December 2012 until May 2013. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1204
R 1 000 additional bonus
Mrs Bloem argued that the R1 000 (one thousand rand) once-off payment that was made to the non-striking employees was only to compensate the employees for travelling expenses and clothing. As there were no staff buses running during this period, employees had to make use of private transport and further employees could not wear their staff uniforms for fear of intimidation.
She further argued that this once off bonus was only promised to the employees once the strike had already commenced, and that this was proof of the fact that this was not intended to dissuade employees to participate in the strike.
Mr Du Plessis testified that the R1 000 (one thousand rand) bonus was paid to employees to compensate them for travelling expenses to and from work as the staff buses were not running. The bonus was further for clothing and unexpected expenses incurred as a result of the strike.
It was the argument of both Unions that the purpose of this bonus was to dissuade employees from participating in the protected strike.
I am satisfied that the respondent could give justifiable reasons as to why they paid non-striking employees an amount of R1 000 (one thousand rand). This money was clearly paid as staff buses were not running and they had to use their own means to get to and from work. They too could not wear their staff uniforms due to possible intimidation and the bonus was to cover any clothes which had to be purchased.
I can find no reason why such amount would have to be paid to the applicants who were not reporting for duty during this period.
Inconsistency relating to Qometa
It is common cause that Qometa was dismissed in November 2012. She referred an unfair dismissal dispute to SARPBAC which matter was arbitrated before Commissioner Hlatswako.
A copy of the arbitration award was submitted as annexure “D”. The Commissioner ordered the respondent to reinstate Qometa in its employ on terms and conditions no less favourable to her than those that governed the employment relationship prior to her dismissal.
Mrs Bloem argued that in terms of the order they could not prejudice Qometa by marking her as absent from work for purposes of the Incentive Bonus Scheme, as the order clearly states that she must be reinstated retrospectively. 
[2014] 12 BALR 1185 (SARPBAC) at 1205
I am satisfied that the respondent could not penalise Qometa as they were bound by the arbitration award and they had to comply with the award. I, therefore, cannot find that the respondent acted inconsistently in this regard. I am satisfied that the respondent had justifiable reasons for implementing the incentive bonus.

6.  Award
I find that the conduct of the respondent, Itumele Bus Lines (Pty) Ltd t/a Interstate Bus Lines, was unfair in that they refused to pay the applicants their Incentive Scheme Bonus for the period December 2012 until May 2013.
The respondent, Itumele Bus Lines (Pty) Ltd t/a Interstate Bus Lines, is ordered to apply the criteria for payment of the incentive bonuses to each applicant’s performance and should there be payments due to the applicants in terms of the scheme then such payments must be made to the applicants before or on 15 August 2014.
No order as to costs is made.

[Numbering as per transcript – Ed.]

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document