



Botes v City of Joburg Property Company SOC Ltd and another [2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC)
Labour Law Reports

Division: Labour Court, Johannesburg
Case No: J937/20
Date: 28/09/2020
Before: GN Moshoana Judge
Keywords


Application in terms of section 158(1)(a) of the LRA
Costs — When payable — Court granting costs order against senior employee to discourage meritless urgent applications challenging suspensions and halting disciplinary proceedings.
Labour Court — Jurisdiction — Court lacking jurisdiction to entertain urgent applications to interdict suspensions even if employees disavows reliance on LRA.
Suspension — Application to interdict — Employee contending that precautionary suspension unlawful — Labour Court declining to interfere with disciplinary process because lacking jurisdiction to do so.
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — Labour Court lacking jurisdiction to entertain claims that suspensions are “unlawful” — Such matters to be referred for arbitration.
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — No hearing required before “precautionary” suspension. 
Sections of the LRA considered
Section 157(2)
Section 157(4)(a)
Section 157(5)
Section 158(1)

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, CEO of the respondent (“CJPC”), was placed on “special leave” after whistle blowers reported alleged irregularities in the appointment of contractors to deep-clean properties administered by the CJPC after a national state of disaster was declared to combat the Covid-19 pandemic. Two months later, the CJPC’s board informed the applicant that she had been placed on precautionary suspension. The applicant claimed in an urgent application that her suspension was unlawful because the board lacked power to suspend her. The CJBC argued that the Labour Court lacked jurisdiction.

The Court noted that complaints regarding suspensions are justiciable in the CCMA or the relevant bargaining council. The Court had jurisdiction in terms of section 157(4)(a) of the LRA to refuse to determine the application because no attempt had been made to resolve the dispute by conciliation. The applicant  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 182
could not rely directly on section 157(2) because the LRA specifically provides that disputes concerning suspension should be referred for arbitration. Suspending an employee is also not an executive or administrative act subject to review. The applicant had expressly disavowed reliance on the LRA and pleaded that her suspension was unlawful, as opposed to unfair. However, without the necessary jurisdiction, the Labour Court lacked power to entertain the matter under section 158. As the highest court had found in Steenkamp and others v (National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa intervening) v Edcon Ltd [2016] 4 BLLR 335 (CC) the Labour Court lacks jurisdiction to deal with matters in which an employee raises unlawfulness, as opposed to unfairness. 

After the applicant’s Counsel had been afforded an opportunity to file further submissions, the applicant’s case had morphed into one concerning an alleged breach of her contract of employment. The Court held that an innocent party’s right to claim specific performance for breach of contract does not equate to a claim that the alleged breach rendered the suspension unlawful. Moreover, the applicant had not pleaded an alleged breach of contract and the matter could not, therefore, reside under section 77(3) of the BCEA. 

The Court held further that intervention under section 158 in matters concerning incomplete disciplinary proceedings in “exceptional circumstances” had been sanctioned by Booysen v Minister of Safety and Security and others [2011] 1 BLLR 83 (LAC) did not assist the applicant because Booysen had been handed down before Edcon and jurisdiction cannot be determined by facts alone. The Court, accordingly, held that it lacked jurisdiction to entertain the application. 

The Court added that even where exceptional circumstances are shown, the Labour Court will lack jurisdiction to grant a remedy unless at the completion of the disciplinary process the applicant has no alternative relief. In any event, the applicant had failed to show that her circumstances were exceptional.

Turning to the applicant’s argument that the CJPC lacked competence to suspend her, the Court accepted that the decision was indeed capable of being set aside on review because the CJPC was an organ of state and had acted in terms of a regulation. However, the applicant had not sought review; she had sought a declaratory order and an interdict. Legality review could, therefore, not be applied. However, on the assumption that it was wrong on the jurisdictional issue, the Court accepted that the applicant was seeking to protect a constitutional right. The CJPC is a private company in which the Johannesburg municipality is sole shareholder. In terms of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act 32 of 2000 the CJPC board was required to appoint a CEO accountable to the board. However, the parties had mistakenly appended an addendum to the applicant’s contract of employment which incorporated the local government disciplinary regulations into the contract. Adopting the “reasonable bystander test”, the Court held that it would be absurd to suggest that the applicant could only be disciplined by the Johannesburg municipality, which was plainly not her employer. The applicant was seeking to take advantage of an obvious error by arguing that the city council, not the CJPC board had disciplinary authority over her. 

 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 183

The Court also rejected the applicant’s argument that the necessary jurisdictional facts for the exercise of the power to suspend her were lacking. The applicant was suspected of serious misconduct. She had been informed of nine allegations of wrongdoing before her suspension. This was sufficient to trigger the power to suspend, and no formal hearing beyond written representations was required before precautionary suspension. The applicant would have failed to make out a case even if the municipal disciplinary regulations had applied.

Turning to costs, the Court noted that judges had repeatedly complained about highly-paid public servants utilising the services of “clever lawyers” to bring urgent applications. Since the applicant earned more than R2m a year, there was no reason why her actions should be financed by tax payers.

The application was dismissed with costs.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Moshoana J:

Introduction
In this application, the applicant, Helen Margaret Botes (“Botes”) alleges unlawful conduct on the part of the board of the City of Jo’burg Property Company (“CJPC”). According to Botes, the board acted ultra vires and as such its decision is bound to be declared as such and be set aside. The onset of this matter is the placing of Botes on a precautionary suspension pending an outcome of disciplinary steps to be taken against her. The basis of the challenge is two-fold, namely (a) the board does not have the power to place her on suspension – differently put, the board acted ultra vires as it usurped the powers of the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality (the “Municipality”) and (b) if so empowered, the necessary jurisdictional facts to exercise the powers were absent. The application is opposed.

Background facts
The CJPC is a municipal entity of the Municipality. On 1 October 2019, Botes commenced employment with the CJPC as a Chief Executive Officer. She entered into a fixed-term contract of employment. Such contract was to endure until September 2024. On or about 30 November 2019, Botes and the CJPC concluded an addendum to the fixed-term employment contract. Relevant to this application, Botes was regarded as a senior employee and the terms of the Local Government: Disciplinary Regulations for Senior Managers1 (“Regulations”) was made applicable to her. Of essence in this application is regulation 6 which deals with precautionary suspensions. 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 184
Around 1 June 2020, the board of the CJPC received a whistle blower’s report making allegations of irregularities in respect of the appointment of contractors to perform deep cleaning services at the various properties owned and administered by the CJPC in consequence of the Disaster Management Regulations. Botes was favoured with a copy of the said report. On 4 June 2020, a second whistle blowing report was received, which was also availed to Botes. In both reports Botes was not directly implicated. Following the reports, it was suggested and agreed to by Botes that she be placed on special leave. She remained on special leave until 25 June 2020.
On 18 August 2020, the board of the CJPC resolved to advise Botes of its intention to place her on a precautionary suspension. On 20 August 2020, Botes was invited to be heard prior to the decision to place her on a precautionary suspension. On 24 August 2020, Botes exercised her right to be heard and effectively challenged the authority of the board to place her on a precautionary suspension. In addition, she highlighted that the allegations lacked particularity.
On 2 September 2020, the board of the CJPC resolved to place Botes on a precautionary suspension. Botes was notified in writing on 4 September 2020 of the resolution to place her on a precautionary suspension. Aggrieved thereby on or about 9 September 2020, Botes launched this application on an urgent basis. The application was enrolled before me on 18 September 2020.

The legal basis of this application
This application rotates on two fulcrums. Chiefly Botes challenges the lawfulness of the decision to place her on a precautionary suspension. The second fulcrum is that the jurisdictional facts allowing for the decision to place her on a precautionary suspension are absent. The case of Botes is predicated on regulation 6. The said regulation reads thus:

“Precautionary suspension

(1) The municipal council may suspend a senior manager at the workplace on full pay if it is alleged that the senior manager has committed an act of misconduct, where the municipal council has reason to believe that –
The presence of the senior manager at the workplace may –
Jeopardise any investigation into alleged misconduct;
Endanger the well-being or safety of any person or municipal property; or
Be detrimental to stability in the municipality; or
The senior manager may –
Interfere with potential witnesses; or
Commit further acts of misconduct.”

Jurisdiction of the Labour Court
In opposing the present application, the respondents took issue with the jurisdiction of the Labour Court. The contention being that the weight of  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 185
  authorities2 in this Court lean towards the lack of jurisdiction by the Labour Court. In the main all the recent authorities took a leaf from the judgment of the Constitutional Court in Steenkamp and others v Edcon Ltd (NUMSA intervening).3 Almost five years ago the learned Justice Van Der Westhuizen in Gcaba v Minister of Safety and Security4 had the following to say:
“52. Finally, it is undoubtedly correct that the same conduct may threaten or violate different constitutional rights and give rise to different causes of action in law, often to be pursued in different for a . . .
75. Jurisdiction is determined on the basis of the pleadings, as Langa CJ held in Chirwa and not the substantive merits of the case . . .”
On the alleged conduct of the board of the CJPC, the following possible causes of actions arises – (a) an unfair labour practice within the contemplation of section 186 of the Labour Relations Act;5 (b) common law breach of contract claim; (c) breach of section 33 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (the “Constitution”) – remediable by review under the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act6 (“PAJA”); (d) breach of section 1(c) of the Constitution – remediable under section 158(1)(h) of the LRA – legality/rationality review.
Fact that a party has various possible causes of action does not suggest that he or she can be remedied even if his or her pleadings sets out one specific cause of action. The Labour Court is a creature of statute and it derives its powers from the LRA and any other law that gives it jurisdiction. Primarily the jurisdiction of the Labour Court arises from section 157 of the LRA. Section 157(1) specifically provides that the Labour Court has exclusive jurisdiction in respect of matters that elsewhere in the LRA or in terms of any other law are to be determined by the Labour Court. In terms of the LRA, matters relating to suspensions within the contemplation of section 186(2)(b) are to be determined by the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (“CCMA”) or a bargaining council and not the Labour Court – section 191(1)(a)(i) and (ii) read with section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA. Botes disavowed the remedies in the LRA.
There can be no doubt that the dispute of Botes is justiciable in the CCMA or at a bargaining council. This not being an appeal or a review this Court in its discretion may refuse to determine the dispute of Botes because it is not satisfied that an attempt was made to resolve the dispute  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 186
  through conciliation – section 157(4)(a). The scheme of the LRA is predicated on amicable dispute resolution mechanism. It is for that reason that this Court and other dispute resolving fora lacks jurisdiction if the dispute has not been referred to conciliation.
Section 157(2) is reserved for alleged or threatened violation of any fundamental right entrenched in Chapter 2 of the Constitution arising from employment and from labour relations or constitutionality of any executive or administrative act or conduct or threat thereof by the State in its capacity as an employer and application of any law for the administration of which the Minister of Employment and Labour is responsible. This jurisdiction is shared with the High Court.
What requires emphasis is that the Labour Court may gravitate to subsection 157(2) only where subsection 157(1) does not give it jurisdiction. Only then would it seek a shared jurisdiction. Where the LRA gives jurisdictions to other statutory fora, it is fundamentally wrong for the Labour Court to approbate to itself jurisdictional powers under subsection 157(2) simply because (a) a fundamental right as entrenched is violated or threatened with violation; and (b) the threat arises from employment and labour relations. A number of other legislations exists to champion the fundamental rights in chapter 2 of the Constitution. For example, the Employment Equity Act7 (“EEA”) guarantees the right to equality. In terms of the EEA certain disputes are justiciable in the CCMA or bargaining council. If section 157(2) is not given a restrictive and purposive interpretation some of the disputes could be taken over by the Labour Court. Section 157(5) makes the point above.
Pleadings aside, the conduct complained of may be astutely tucked under section 157(2) because it affects the fundamental right to fair labour practices – section 23(1) of the Constitution of Botes. In my view, it shall be inappropriate for this Court to assume jurisdiction when the LRA – a statute passed to give effect to the rights in section 23 of the Constitution – provides that unfair labour disputes in relation to unfair suspensions should be justiciable under section 191 by the CCMA or bargaining council. Without entertaining the debate around lawfulness and fairness, if the legislature wished to clothe any of the dispute resolving bodies including the Labour Court with powers to entertain the lawfulness of a suspension, the Legislature could have said so. The conclusion I arrive at is that the claim of Botes cannot be entertained under section 157(2). An act of placing an employee on a precautionary suspension is not an executive or administrative act. On Botes’ version, the board is incapable of exercising powers emanating from the regulations. Only a municipal council has that capability. In any event the regulations fall under the administration of the Minister of Local Government and not of Department of Employment and Labour. 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 187
I now turn to the pleadings of Botes. As a general principle, a party makes his or her case in the founding papers. In the founding affidavit she testified as follows:
“7. This is an application in which I seek a declarator that my suspension by the Board of Directors of the first respondent [CJPC], which was communicated to me on 4 September 2020, be declared to be unlawful and where I seek an order that the board be directed by the above Honourable Court to withdraw the notice of suspension, and to permit me to return to work forthwith.
32. The decision to suspend me, therefore, falls to be declared unlawful and accordingly reversed.
38. For avoidance of doubt, the interdict sought is final in nature.”
As pointed out earlier the jurisdiction of the Labour Court arises from section 157. Section 158 deals with the powers and not jurisdiction of the Labour Court. In other words, the Labour Court may exercise any powers in section 158 if it has jurisdiction to entertain a matter. That simply means that the Labour Court is not empowered to for instance declare as being unlawful and or interdict actions that do not resides under its jurisdiction. As it can be observed, Botes invokes some of the available powers of the Labour Court – declaratory order – section 158(1)(a)(iv) and interdict – section 158(1)(a)(ii) of the LRA. Unfortunately, where the Labour Court lacks jurisdiction it cannot exercise those powers.
The case pleaded by Botes is that of unlawfulness and not unfairness. To that end I fully endorse the view expressed by my brother Van Niekerk J in Shezi v SAPS,8 when he said:
“12. The effect of this judgment [Steenkamp v Edcon] is that when an applicant alleges that a dismissal is unlawful (as opposed to unfair), there is no remedy under the LRA and this court has no jurisdiction to make any determination of unlawfulness.”
Although the Labour Court is a Court of law and equity – section 151(1) of the LRA, when it comes to jurisdiction, like any administrative body, its’ jurisdiction arises or is predicated on certain jurisdictional facts – that is section 157 of the LRA. Plainly, the Labour Court cannot exercise jurisdiction if section 157 does not allow it. Jurisdiction sits on two pillars. Firstly, there must be jurisdictional facts (section 157). Secondly, the power itself (section 158). In Kimberly Junior School and another v Head, Northern Cape Education Department and others9 the Supreme Court of Appeal said the following, which mutatis mutandis apply with equal force to Courts that are creatures of a statute:

“Under common law, necessary preconditions that must exist before an administrative power can be exercised are referred to as ‘jurisdictional facts’. In the absence of such preconditions or jurisdictional facts, so it is said, the administrative authority effectively has no power to act at all.”

 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 188
More appropriately in this matter, without the necessary jurisdiction emanating from section 157 of the LRA, the Labour Court has no powers under section 158 at all. In support of her case for jurisdiction, Botes heavily relies on judgments10 pre-Steenkamp. In Johann Mettler v Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality11 which was decided in 2019 post Steenkamp the Court does not specifically deal with the jurisdiction of the Labour Court. It is no authority for the proposition that this Court retains jurisdiction. After hearing argument, I directed Mr Franklin SC to the cases post Steenkamp. He required time until after 23 September 2020. He was afforded that time. In turn supplementary submissions were made. Apparent from those submissions is a volte face from unlawfulness to a breach of contract claim justiciable under section 77(3) of the BCEA. It does seem that Botes seeks to equate unlawfulness with a breach. Much as this Court accepts that at a general level where a party breaches a contract that party is said to be acting unlawfully. By definition unlawfulness means the quality of failing to conform to law, acting contrary to accepted morality or convention; illegal or illicit. Reliance was placed on Wereley v Productivity SA and another.12 This judgment is distinguishable in that Wereley specifically pleaded section 77(3) of the BCEA. Botes placed emphasis on the relief granted by my brother Lagrange J in Wereley. He declared the conduct to be unlawful and in breach of a contract of employment and void ab initio. I take a different view on the issue of a remedy.
Where a party to the contract does not act in accordance with the terms of the contract, that party is said to be repudiating the contract. The innocent party has a right to accept the repudiation and elect to hold the other party to the contract or cancel the contract and claim damages. If the guilty party does not perform as per the terms of the contract, the innocent party may approach a competent court to seek what is known as specific performance. Therefore, a court may at its discretion order specific performance. That in my view does not extend to declaring unlawfulness. In order for a party to obtain a relief of specific performance, that party must first show – breach/repudiation – unlawful act. As a general rule of the law of contract not all breaches/repudiations lead to automatic end of the contract. The innocent party must first make an election. If that party elects to keep the contract alive despite the repudiation – unlawful act – that party may sue for specific performance.
It is observed that other than stating that Steenkamp is limited to cases where the LRA is ostensibly relied on, Botes did not deal with the Shezi and Phahlane judgments. To that extend, I do not believe to be Botes’ argument that those judgments are wrong. I do not agree with a submission  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 189
  that Steenkamp is confined. The principle in Steenkamp can be summarised as follows: where an employee alleges unlawfulness and not unfairness, the Labour Court lacks jurisdiction.
Botes does acknowledge that in her pleadings, she did not allege any breach nor did she reference section 77(3). Much as Botes attempts to hide behind the difference between breach and unlawfulness, her claim is not pleaded as one of breach and shall not reside in section 77(3). In Lt-General Phahlane v SAPS and others,13 this Court stated the following:
“[9] Ordinarily, pleadings in a claim of this nature [contractual claim] would assert that term of the contract relied upon, alleged breach of that contract by the employer, record an election to enforce the contract by way of specific performance, and seek consequential relief. The cause of action of action is clearly one of unlawfulness, in the form of an alleged breach of Regulation 9, and no more.”
I fully agree with the above statement. It is only now in argument that Botes seeks to contend that section 77(3) finds application. In Phahlane, the following was said to which I fully agree:
“[6] . . . In other words, a party referring a dispute to this court for adjudication must necessarily point to a provision of the LRA or some other law that provides for that dispute to be determined by this Court . . .”
This Court is not persuaded that it retains jurisdiction in this matter. Accordingly, the application ought to be dismissed for want of jurisdiction. What remains is the exceptionality argument. In Booysen v Minister of Safety and Security and others,14 the Labour Appeal Court (LAC) differed with Acting Justice Cheadle that the jurisdiction of the Labour Court is ousted when it comes to incomplete disciplinary steps. First and foremost, Booysen was decided before Steenkamp. By necessary implications Booysen may have been overruled by Steenkamp in my view.
In dealing with the question of jurisdiction, the LAC made reference to sections 157 and 158 of the LRA as well as section 77(3) of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act15 (“BCEA”) and the Constitutional Court judgments of Chirwa v Transnet Limited and others16 and Gcaba. After that it concluded thus:
“36. The enquiry in matters of these nature under discussion is whether the facts presented indicate whether the Labour Court has jurisdiction to determine the dispute.”
With respect this seems to confine jurisdiction to the facts as opposed to what the LRA provides. In Steenkamp the Constitutional Court was more concerned with what the LRA states. In my view, since the Labour Court is a creature of a statute, the place to seek and find its jurisdiction is the statute that begets it. The Labour Court has no jurisdiction beyond those granted by the statute creating it. Section 173 provides that the named  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 190
  courts have inherent power to protect and regulate their own process and to develop the common law, taking into account the interests of justice. This section, in my view does not give the Labour Court as a Court of a similar status as the High Court inherent jurisdiction in all employer and employee matters. Its exclusive jurisdiction is circumscribed by the provisions of section 157 of the LRA. In Ex Parte Millsite Investments Co (Pty) Ltd,17 the following was said:

“. . . apart from powers specifically conferred by statutory enactments and subject to any deprivation of power by the same source, a Supreme Court can entertain a claim or give any order which at common law it would be entitled so to entertain or give. It is to that reservoir of power that reference is made where various judgments courts have spoken of the inherent power of the Supreme Court. The inherent power is not merely one derived from the need to make the court order effective, and to control its own procedure, but to hold the scales of justice where no law provides directly for such a given situation.”

In my view where the statute circumscribes the power a Court of a similar status as the High Court cannot willy-nilly invoke its inherent powers. In Booysen, the LAC endorsed the observation by the Labour Court that if the Court has jurisdiction it would have the power to grant an appropriate remedy and it does not follow that because the Labour Court has the power to grant the remedy it has the jurisdiction to determine the matter. At the end the LAC answered the question as follows:

“To answer the question that was before the court a quo, the Labour Court has jurisdiction to interdict any unfair conduct including disciplinary action. However, such intervention should be exercised in exceptional circumstances. It is not appropriate to set out the test. It should be left to the discretion of the Labour Court to exercise such powers having regard to the facts of each case. Among the factors to be considered would in my view be whether the failure to intervene would lead to grave injustice or whether justice might be attained by other means. The list is exhaustive.”

What can be observed with ease is that exceptionality does not beget jurisdiction. It only begets intervention by the Court. The corollary of that is that even where exceptional circumstances are shown, where this Court lacks jurisdiction it cannot entertain the matter. Of course the worrying factor is that of the Labour Court assuming jurisdiction on any unfair conduct or disciplinary action. In terms of the LRA matters involving unfair suspension or other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal are to be determined by the CCMA or bargaining council. When regard is had to Steenkamp all the remedies are derived from the LRA and unfairness is the guide. In terms of the LRA the Labour Court shares jurisdiction with the CCMA and the bargaining council in most of the disputes.
The LRA is crafted in such a manner that matters reserved for the jurisdiction of the Labour Court are carefully spelled out. Nowhere in the LRA does one find jurisdiction approbated to the Labour Court in respect of unfair conduct or disciplinary action. Nonetheless as the court below I  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 191
  am bound by Booysen. To the extent that this Court assumes jurisdiction, this Court refuses to exercise its discretion to intervene. Exceptional circumstances are those that are unusual or different. The Constitutional Court in the matter of Law Society of South Africa and others v President of the Republic of South Africa and others (Southern Africa Litigation Centre and another as amici curiae) 18 cautioned thus:
“[24] Courts therefore ought to intervene in incomplete processes only when no other avenue is realistically available to adequately address whatever grievances the people might have.”
In my view the better approach is to ask if there are no other avenues as opposed to attempting to define and or find the so-called exceptional circumstances. It is too arduous a task for the Labour Court. It has been shown in this Court that parties make up all sorts of “exceptional circumstances” not only to put one foot at the door – jurisdiction – but to get this Court to stop some unfair but beguiled as unlawful conduct. It is only where a person may not be afforded a substantial relief once the process is completed because the underlying conduct would have achieved its object would a Court intervene.19
An employee who has been “unlawfully” suspended has substantial relief in due course. In an instance where, as it is the case here, an employee’s main gripe is that of being suspended by the wrong person, there is no basis for the Court to intervene. I must state that under common law where a person exercises a power that he or she does not have, it is said that the person acted ultra vires – an incidence of a rule of law. In the constitutional order ultra vires offends the principle of legality, which renders such a conduct reviewable in law. I shall return to the issue of a legality review in due course. However, on application of the Oudekraal20 principle a decision factually remains until set aside by a competent court. Botes does not seek a review before this Court.
The conclusion I reach is that Botes failed to demonstrate any exceptional circumstances that would entitle this Court to intervene at this stage. Of course this aspect runs in tandem with the issue of urgency. Where exceptional circumstances are not shown there exist no reason to entertain a matter as one of urgency. The application must fail on this front too.

The remedy of review
As pointed out above the conduct complained of by Botes is capable of being set aside on review. There can be no doubt that the CJPC is an organ of state. Also there can be no doubt that the regulation has a status of subordinate legislation. Although the concept of exercise of public power is an elusive and difficult pony to ride, it can be safely stated that exercising powers emanating from regulation 6 is an exercise of statutory power.  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 192

  A functionary cannot exercise powers that he or she does not have. Such offends a principle of legality.

In this Court legality reviews are brought under section 157(1) read with section 158(1)(h) of the LRA. It has been held in this Court that where the LRA provides another remedy, section 158(1)(h) may not be invoked. However, in this instance, Botes conveniently disavowed the remedies of the LRA, it can be conveniently concluded that there is no other remedy in the LRA.
Of course the pleaded case of Botes is not one of review but that of a declarator and an interdict. On this simple basis this Court shall not consider whether the conduct offends the principle of legality.

The breach of contract claim
Botes alleges that the terms of the regulations are incorporated in her employment contract. In terms of section 77(3) of the BCEA, this Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the civil courts to hear and determine any matter concerning a contract of employment. It is worth repeating that in a case involving a breach of contract, the innocent party has an election to make. Either to hold the other party to the contract or cancel the contract and sue for damages. Botes did not plead a breach and did not indicate any election she made.
A remedy of specific performance is a discretionary one. It is a remedy that must be afforded sparingly particularly in employment contracts.21 Botes did not, in her notice of motion, seek specific performance in a contractual sense. She sought an order to be permitted to return to work. Where a party approaches this Court under section 77(3) such a party must state so in his or her founding papers. Having scoured the papers before me I searched in vain any reference to section 77(3) of the BCEA or any alleged breach. The conclusion I reach is, therefore, that this is not a section 77(3) application.

The merits of the application
Assuming I am wrong on the jurisdiction issue, I proceed to consider the merits of the application. The declarator sought by Botes is not one of declaration of rights as between the parties. It is one as contemplated in section 172 of the Constitution. This power requires a dealing with a constitutional matter. In terms of section 167 (7) of the Constitution, a constitutional matter includes any issue involving the interpretation, protection or enforcement of the Constitution. Section 1(c) of the Constitution provides for the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law. As pointed out above ultra vires is an incidence of a rule of law. Clearly, Botes is seeking to enforce or protect a rule of law. 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 193

The issue of who must exercise the power
A textual reading of regulation 6 suggests that only the Municipality may exercise the power. Of course often times the textual reading does not reveal the intention of the parties. Where the literal interpretation leads to absurdity then it ought to be abandoned in search of the ever illusive intention of the parties.

The relationship between the CJPC and the Municipality
The Local Government: Municipal Systems Act22 (“Systems Act”) defines a municipal entity to mean a private company referred to in section 86B(1)(a) of the Systems Act. It must follow that CJPC is a private company. The old principle of Salomon v Salomon and Co Ltd23 is that a company holds its corporate identity and is separate from its shareholders. That being applied, the Municipality is a shareholder or, aptly put, an interest holder in CJPC.
Section 93J(1) of the Systems Act obligates and empowers the board of directors of a municipal entity to appoint a chief executive authority. Section 93J(2) states that the chief executive officer is accountable to the Board. The dictionary meaning of the word “accountable” is expected or required to account for one’s action; answerable. It has been held that a power to appoint implies the power to discipline.24 The trouble in this matter started when the parties concluded an addendum. The parties chose to adapt the regulations without carefully considering that certain terms like a municipal council does not apply to them. At that time, Botes must have known that her employer that she answerable to is the CJPC and not the Municipality.
Similarly, the CJPC was under no illusion that it dealt with Botes as an employee of its shareholder. I do not believe that if an officious bystander would have asked Botes and the CJPC shortly after the addendum was concluded that where reference is made to the municipal council it refers to the CJPC, they both could have said “oh yes of course”. Where it is equitable and reasonable to do so a court of law may imply terms into a contract of the parties or fill the apparent missing gap. The legal position is that only the CJPC may employ a Chief Executive Officer and that person so employed is answerable to the board of the CJPC. Section 93A(b) of the Systems Act obligates the Municipality to allow the CJPC to fulfil their responsibilities. That being so, it is incongruent with settled legal position that a non-employer may instil discipline on a non-employee. This Court in Shabane v Nkwinti and another25 remarked as follows:
“[33] . . . To my mind it defies logic for a Minister not to have powers to discipline a head that serves in a department under his or her control . . .” 
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 194
I hold a view that it shall be illogical to think that a Municipality that did not appoint a person would have powers to discipline that person. It shall be congruent with section 93L read with 93A of the Systems Act to imply26 that where a municipal council is employed in the regulations it must mean the board of directors since only them have the statutory power to appoint. As correctly argued by Mr Sibanda appearing for the respondents the CJPC is not empowered to delegate upwards. In itself it acts on delegated powers as delegated by legislation. The most common form of delegation occurs when someone in a superior role transfer authority to a subordinate. On application of the principle delegatus non potest delegare, the CJPC cannot delegate delegated powers. With all the above legal principles I conclude that the parties intended to mean board of directors and not the municipal council and they simply forgot to make the necessary changes in their contract when they incorporated the regulations into the employment contract.
Botes is simply taking advantage of that situation whilst knowing fully that she is not accountable to the Municipality but to the board of directors. There is simply no basis upon which it can be reasonably concluded that Botes has any relationship of employment with the Municipality. Therefore, it is absurd to conclude that the parties seriously intended the Municipality and its council to take a decision to suspend Botes. The conclusion I reach is that the decision to suspend was taken by the right body and as such it was not ultra vires.

The basis of unlawfulness
The unlawfulness allegation hinges on two grounds. The first ground has already been dealt with above. I took a view that on a contextual and purposive interpretation of the employment contract much as the parties were not empowered to amend the regulations, it was within their powers to specify that where municipal council is referred to it meant the board of directors. This Court in order to arrive at a sensible interpretation in order to establish the intention of the parties it must imply that reference. With that possibility, the first ground is bound to fail.
The second ground relates to the presence of jurisdictional facts to enable the exercise of the power. Mr Franklin SC relegated this ground to being a subsidiary ground. Of relevance in this ground is the phrase “reason to believe”. The term reason to believe received judicial attention in Vumba Intertrade CC v Geometric Intertrade CC,27 where the Court concluded that the reason to believe must be constituted by facts giving rise to such belief and a blind relief or a belief based on such information or hearsay evidence as a reasonable man ought to or could not give credence to does not suffice. In that judgment, the Court was seeking to interpret section 8  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 195
  of the repealed Close Corporation Act.28 In Dladla v Council of Mbombela Local Municipality and another,29 this Court stated the following:
“[18] Clause 9.1 gives the second respondent, obviously through the first respondent a discretion to suspend. However, that discretion has to be triggered in my view by the presence of allegations that he has committed a serious misconduct. Clause 9.1 does not suggest that the said allegations ought to be communicated to the municipal manager before suspension.
[19] The wording is clear. Once an allegation exist that a serious misconduct has been committed that is sufficient to trigger the coming into operation of clause 9.1 in particular. The belief that the municipal manager may jeopardise investigation is in the absolute discretion of the municipality. Therefore, the test is subjective. Such belief need not be communicated to the applicant before suspension.”
Mr Franklin SC submitted that Botes’ issue is that the allegations were not communicated adequately to her. This Court fails to understand this submission. In the letter of 20 August 2020, a catalogue of 9 allegations were placed before Botes. Mr Franklin SC placed reliance on the decision of NDPP v Zuma30 to advance a submission that the CJPC was obligated to communicate its reason to believe to Botes. I do not believe that this judgment advances Botes’ case by an ounce. Rights of a person to be arrested are constitutional rights – section 35 of the Constitution – and are viewed differently from the rights of the person to be suspended.
Properly viewed, Botes laments the contravention of the audi alteram partem rule. That right is guaranteed in regulation 6(2) which provides that before a senior manager may be suspended, he or she must be given an opportunity to make written representation to the municipal council why he or she should not be suspended within seven days of being notified of the council’s decision to suspend him or her. The above is the full extent of the right. Nowhere is it stated that the senior employee must be informed of the reason to believe. This situation is analogous to a retrenchment situation. An employer is entitled to take a preliminary decision to retrench without consulting the employee to be affected.
The only time a senior employee is entitled to some information is when the municipal council informs a senior employee in writing of the reasons for his or her suspension on or before the senior employee is suspended. During the exercise of audi alteram partem a senior employee engages with the reasons why he or she should not be suspended and not with why the municipal council reached its decision to suspend. In exercising the right, there is nothing to prevent the senior employee to settle the mind of the municipal council that his or her presence at workplace may not jeopardise any investigations; endanger the well-being or safety of any person or municipal property; be detrimental to stability in the municipality; not interfere with potential witnesses or commit further misconduct. Considering the fact that a municipal council may have taken a subjective view,  
[2021] 2 BLLR 181 (LC) at 196
  it may be appropriate to dissuade the municipal council to continue to hold the subjective view. The regulations obligate a municipal council to consider any representation submitted to it within a particular period. In making her submissions, Botes addressed the issue of the risk of interference, which pertinently addresses the question – why she should not be suspended.
I, therefore, reach a conclusion that the provisions of the contract of employment incorporating regulation 6 has not been contravened. There is no basis for this Court to declare any unlawfulness on the part of CJPC or interdict it in any manner or form. This application is bound to fail for all the reasons set out above.

The issue of costs
In every judgment of this Court, its judges bitterly complain about the abuse of court processes by senior managers of adequate means. Botes earned well over two million rand. She can afford the services of what Acting Justice Snyman referred to as “clever lawyers”.31 Most of the time, if not all the times, the respondents defend these types of applications using taxpayers’ coffers. It certainly becomes unacceptable for these respondents to be mulcted with costs in such applications. The message that this Court must send out is that costs will follow the results. I have no hesitation in my mind that this matter warrants a cost order.
In the result, the following order is made: 

Order
The application is dismissed.
The applicant to pay the respondents’ costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above judgment:


Footnotes
1	  Promulgated in terms of s 120 of the Municipal Systems Act 32 of 2000 and published under GN344 GG34213 on 21 April 2011.
2	 Raseroka v SAA SOC Ltd (2020) 41 ILJ 978 (LC) [also reported at [2020] JOL 46628 – Ed]; DEMAWUSA v City of Johannesburg (2) (2020) 41 ILJ 912 (LC) [also reported at [2020] 6 BLLR 574 (LC) – Ed]; Lt General Phahlane v SAPS J736/2020 11 August 2020; Shezi v SAPS J852/20 15 September 2020 and Singhala v Ernst and Young Incorporated and another (2019) 4 ILJ 1083 (LC) [also reported at [2019] 5 BLLR 494 (LC) – Ed].
3	  (2016) 37 ILJ 564 (CC) [also reported at [2016] 4 BLLR 335 (CC) – Ed].
4	  2010 (1) SA 238 (CC) [also reported at [2009] 12 BLLR 1145 (CC) – Ed].
5	  66 of 1995, as amended.
6	  3 of 2000.
7	  55 of 1998.
8	  Unreported decision. Case number: J852/20. Delivered: 15 September 2020.
9	  2010 (1) SA 217 (SCA) [also reported at [2009] 4 All SA 135 (SCA) – Ed].
10	  See: Nothnagel v Karoo Hoogland Municipality 2012 JDR 1533 (LC); Mayaba v CCMA 2014 JDR 2219 (LC); Johann Mettler v Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality. Unreported decision. Case number P487/2018. Delivered: 2 July 2019.
11	  Unreported decision. Case number P487/2018. Delivered: 2 July 2019.
12	  (2020) 41 ILJ 997 (LC) [also reported at [2020] JOL 46622 (LC) – Ed].
13	  Case number J736/20 delivered on 7 August 2020.
14	  (2011) 32 ILJ 112 (LAC) [also reported at [2011] 1 BLLR 83 (LAC) – Ed].
15	  75 of 1997.
16	  [2008] 2 BLLR 97 (CC).
17	  1965 (2) SA 582 (T) [also reported at [1965] 2 All SA 573 (T) – Ed].
18	  2019 (3) BCLR 329 (CC).
19	  See Doctors for Life International v Speaker of the National Assembly and others 2006 (6) SA 416 (CC) [also reported at 2006 (12) BCLR 1399 (CC) – Ed].
20	  See Oudekraal Estates (Pty) Ltd v City of Cape Town and others [2004] 3 All SA 1 (SCA).
21	  See Santos PFC (Pty) Ltd v Igesund and another 2002 (5) SA 697 (C) [also reported at [2002] 10 BLLR 1017 (C) – Ed].
22	  32 of 2000.
23	  [1896] UKHL 1.
24	 Masethla v President of the Republic of South Africa and another 2008 (1) SA 566 (CC) [also reported at 2008 (1) BCLR 1 (CC) – Ed] and Shabane v Nkwinti and another. Unreported decision. Case number J1947/17. Delivered: 18 January 2018.
25	  Unreported decision. Case number J1947/17. Delivered: 18 January 2018.
26	  See Alfred McAlpine and Son (Pty) Ltd v TPA 1974 (3) SA 506 (A) [also reported at [1974] 3 All SA 497 (A) – Ed].
27	  2001 (2) SA 1068 (W) [also reported at [2001] JOL 7976 (W) – Ed].
28	  69 of 1984.
29	  (2008) 29 ILJ 1902 (LC) [also reported at [2008] 8 BLLR 751 (LC) – Ed].
30	  [2009] 2 All SA 243 (SCA).
31	  See: fn 2 Raseroka (supra).

For the applicant:

Adv AE Franklin SC and Adv Y Peer instructed by Edward S Classen and Kaka Attorneys, Epsom Downs
For the first respondents: 

Adv M Sibanda instructed by Mkhabela Huntley Attorneys, Sandton.


End of Document