



MOSSAWU obo Khoza / Mr Price Weekend Material [2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: CCMA, Pretoria
Case No: GAPT2654-05
Date: 13/06/2005
Before: B van Wyk, Commissioner (CCMA)
Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA

Keywords


Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Derivative misconduct — Employee failing to inform employer immediately of identity of thief — Dismissal justified.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a store assistant, was dismissed for failing to disclose information relating to the theft, by another employee, of a customer’s cellular phone. The respondent contended that the applicant’s conduct had breached the trust relationship. The applicant claimed that he had not named the culprit because he was “afraid”.

The commissioner held that the offence for which the applicant had been dismissed was a form of “derivative misconduct”. The requirements for derivative misconduct are that the employee knew or could have acquired knowledge of the wrongdoing, and that the employee failed to take reasonable steps to assist the employer acquire that knowledge. The applicant had been aware of the identity of the thief and knew that the company had an anonymous hotline. Although the applicant had volunteered the information after the police had arrested the thief, his reasons for so doing were unknown. By not immediately coming forward, he had failed to exhibit the degree of honesty and good faith required of employees. 

The applicant’s dismissal was upheld.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing and representation

This matter was heard at the offices of the CCMA at 351 Schoeman Street Pretoria on Friday, 10 June 2005. 

Mr Kobus Olivier, an Area Manager from Mr Price Weekend Material in the Gauteng area, represented the respondent party. The applicant party, Mr Howard Khoza, was represented by Mr Johannes Mahlangu, a Union Official from MOSSAWU (Motor, Steel, Security and Allied Workers Union and Catering Trade). It was not disputed that the respondent has its head office Durban, KwaZulu-Natal and that it was a division of Mr Price Group Limited.

Two sets of documents were entered into this arbitration and were marked as follows:

• Exhibit 1 > Company’s bundle of documents paginated from 1 to 18;

• Exhibit 2 > Business Code of Conduct of Mr Price Group Ltd paginated from 1 to 8.

The hearing was electronically recorded and two (2) cassette tapes were used. 

 
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 962

Issue to be decided

Procedural fairness was not in dispute and I am only required to assess whether the substantive merits of the dismissal had been fair, failing which, to then consider retrospectively reinstating the applicant into the respondent’s employ.

Background to the issue

The applicant was employed as a “Store Associate” with Mr Price Weekend Material at its “Malls @ Reds” branch at Rooihuiskraal in Gauteng. The employer party does its business within the retail clothing industry and has 360 stores nationally. At the date of his dismissal on Monday, the 14th of February 2005 the applicant party was remunerated at R1 835 per month. 

The applicant declared a dispute at the CCMA on the 14th of March 2005 alleging an unfair dismissal. The respondent party objected formally to the con/arb process and Commissioner Wimpy Ferreira had no alternative at conciliation on 8 April 2005 but to issue a “Certificate of Outcome” to the effect that the dispute remained unresolved when it became clear that the parties were unable to reconcile their differences. Mr Khoza then on 11 April 2004 filed CCMA form 7.13 requesting the dispute to be arbitrated before the Commission. Subsequently, CCMA case management informed both parties on 18 April 2005 that this dispute had been set down for arbitration at its offices in Pretoria at 2pm on 10 of June 2004.

That was the case before me.

Survey of evidence and argument

Dismissal was not in dispute, and in terms of section 192(2) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the Act”) the onus was on to the respondent party to show that it was substantively fair. 

Both parties presented me with a brief opening statement, the respondent indicating that it would show through evidence and witnesses that the applicant withheld crucial evidence relating to a fellow employee’s dishonest conduct (theft) from the employer. Moreover, that the applicant had known on the exact date that the customer’s phone was stolen precisely who the true culprit had been and failed to bring this to the employer’s attention. 

When the respondent eventually discovered Mr Khoza’s misconduct that the company proceeded to justly and fairly having his services terminated. What is more, that the evidence would show that the employee could no longer be trusted in that his conduct unquestionably from the employer’s perspective had brought the name of the entire Mr Price Group in disrepute. In particular, that of Mr Price at “Malls @ Reds” at Rooihuiskraal where the applicant was employed at. 

Mr Mahlangu in opening indicated that the “evidentiary material” would convincingly demonstrate that Mr Khoza had never breached any rule of the employer, nor stolen anything whatsoever. A certain Mr Makgopa’s cellular phone had merely gone missing in the respondent’s store and that the applicant had assisted the customer throughout the process to trace the phone. In addition that Mr Khoza assisted the customer when the true culprit who had stolen his  
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 963
cellular phone, a “casual worker”, Ms Nomsa Mashangu was eventually positively identified and apprehended. 

The respondent’s case 

The respondent called two witnesses who both gave evidence under oath.

1st Witness: Ms Betsie Kraft

The witness in her sworn evidence testified that:

She had been the store manager for 11 years at Mr Price “Malls @ Reds” where the applicant had been employed when dismissed.
On 21 December 2004 a certain Mr Makgopa whilst shopping at the respondent’s store realised that his cellular phone had gone missing. An intercom announcement was made to all staff the next day when the customer, having been unable to locate his phone, brought the issue of his missing phone to management’s attention (see page 15 of exhibit 1). At the time the applicant “assisted” Mr Makgopa in phoning his cellular number in a “superficial attempt” to trace the missing phone – well knowing that a fellow employee – a Ms Nomsa Mashangu – had in fact taken the phone for herself.
During January of 2005 the SA Police Services came to the store and apprehended Ms Mashangu for the theft of Mr Makgopa’s phone. Mr Khoza then “suddenly came forward” and volunteered that he had “all along known” Ms Mashangu to have been the true culprit that had stolen the cellular phone on 21 December the previous year.
She finds it strange that the applicant only came forward when the SA Police apprehended Ms Mashangu, more so, in that the employer has an anonymous “whistleblowers fraud line” available had the applicant in fact bona fide wanted to disclose who the true thief had been all along. All employees have free and unfettered access to this line.
The applicant was then charged as follows: 

“Gross Misconduct in that you:

During December 2004 / January 2005 knowingly withheld information relating to the theft / suspected theft of a customer’s cell phone by another associate on the Company’s premises. 

This has led to a breakdown of trust in the working relationship” (see page 13 of exhibit 1). 

Under cross-examination the witness testified that:

She had no knowledge related to an alleged “inconsistent” application of discipline relating to a Ms Natasha Jennings who had allegedly misappropriated R10, save to say that the applicant had been disciplined.
She insisted that Mr Khoza only came forward when the SA Police Services arrested Ms Mashangu, and that he had knowingly “withheld valuable information” from his employer for a considerable period of time. This was contradictory to the requirements on page 8 in exhibit 2, namely the respondent’s “Business Code of Conduct” that compelled employees to “promptly and confidentially report” such misconduct. 
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 964

2nd Witness: Mr Prenton Naidoo

The witness in his sworn evidence testified that:

He was an Area Manager of the respondent that presided over the internal disciplinary enquiry of the applicant, and that he eventually regarded the only appropriate sanction open to him for the misconduct committed by Mr Khoza as that of dismissal.
It was clear to him that the applicant at the time had withheld the knowledge of the customer’s cellular phone from Mr Price. In addition, that it was easily verifiable from page 9 in exhibit 1 that Mr Khoza had “pleaded guilty” to the charge that he had been dismissed on. Moreover, that the true culprit was only apprehended in that the customer pursued the investigation himself by obtaining MTN phone records through which Ms Mashangu could eventually be traced. Decidedly, not as a result of Mr Khoza’s “purported assistance”.
The evidence that was presented to him during the internal disciplinary enquiry unquestionably had been that the applicant “only decided to come forward” once the SA Police Services apprehended the guilty party at the workplace.
He could vouch for the fact that the company’s “whistleblower fraud line” was completely anonymous.

The applicant’s case

The applicant was the only witness called to testify and he did so under oath.

Mr Howard Khoza

The witness in his sworn evidence stated that:

Certain circumstances such as “fear” justified him “withholding the info” regarding the stolen cellular phone from Mr Price.
He conceded that he assisted Mr Makgopa when he brought the missing cell phone to management’s attention. However, he deemed it as appropriate to “first talk to the lady to bring back the cell phone” and when this failed, he distanced himself altogether from Ms Mashangu’s misconduct, as he “did not want to get in trouble”.
The customer eventually withdrew the entire case against Ms Mashangu and had only pursued the matter to get his cell phone returned to him.

Under cross-examination the witness testified that:

He had not disclosed his knowledge of Ms Mashangu’s theft to the employer, as he had been “afraid”.
The applicant was unable to give a rational explanation as to why he was no longer afraid when the SA Police Services apprehended Ms Mashangu. He merely indicated that he had been “confused” at the time.
He pleaded guilty because “he had been forced to”. On a question of clarity from the arbitrator why his representative, Ms Louisa Tshabalala had allowed the employer to compel him to do so, Mr Khoza was unable to give a coherent clarification of this allegation. 
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 965

In conclusion of this matter I deemed it as appropriate to clarify from Mr Khoza as to what he would have done in a hypothetical situation had he observed a customer stealing from Mr Price. He responded that he immediately “would have had him arrested”. 

Both parties presented me with a brief oral closing argument. The essence of Mr Olivier’s submission being that the facts speak for themselves and that the employer party quite simply would never again be able to trust Mr Khoza. In his view, this relationship was not just “impaired” or “damaged” but irreparably “severed, never to be mended again”.

Mr Price is a “cash business” that depended on the integrity and honesty of its employees for the company’s economic survival in the market.

Mr Mahlangu in closing indicated that the true culprit is no longer with the company and that the applicant had not gained a single cent as a result of Ms Mashangu’s misconduct. 

From his perspective the commissioner ought to intervene, as the sanction of dismissal coupled with clear indications of the inconsistent application of discipline was “shocking”. When a sanction is shocking, a commissioner must intervene. It would be more appropriate to reinstate the applicant with a final written warning instead of a harsh sanction such as dismissal. It should be noted that Mr Khoza had nothing to gain, had not been directly involved and finally that he had suffered immensely as a result of Ms Mashangu’s theft.

Analysis of evidence and argument

The applicant has alleged that an unfair dismissal had taken place. Section 192 of the Act (66 of 1995) places the onus on the employer to show that the dismissal was fair. Insofar as substantive fairness is concerned, the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal as contained in Schedule 8 to the Act sets out the guidelines for employers to follow when dismissing an employee for misconduct. 

In terms of item 7 of Schedule 8 the employer is required to show:

That the employee contravened a rule;
That the rule was valid and reasonable;
That the employee knew or should have known the rule;
That the rule was applied consistently, and
That dismissal was a fair and appropriate sanction.

Can it be said that the wilful “non-disclosure” of an employee who has knowledge of a fellow employee’s misconduct in itself constitutes misconduct? If so, ought such misconduct to be visited by a sanction as harsh as that of dismissal?

In assessing the merits of the case before me I can come to no other conclusion that the matter before me constitutes a classic example as to what the Labour Courts refer to as ‘derivative misconduct’.

This particular form of misconduct was first suggested by the Labour Appeal Court in: FAWU and others v Amalgamated Beverage Industries Ltd1 (1994) 15 ILJ 1057 (LAC) and has as its very core and essence that the “employee’s  
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 966
silence justifies an inference that he participated or supported” the particular misconduct that he had failed to disclose to his employer.

Prof John Grogan at page 165 in Dismissal 2002 expressly refers to a decision subsequent to that of Amalgamated Industries (supra), namely that of: Chauke and others v Lee Service Centre CC t/a Leeson Motors (1998) 19 ILJ 1441 (LAC) where the Court with approval noted that:

“This approach involved a derived justification, stemming from an employee’s failure to offer reasonable assistance in the detection of those actually responsible for the misconduct. Though the dismissal is designed to target the perpetrators of the original misconduct, the justification is wide enough to encompass those innocent of it, but who through their silence make themselves guilty of a derivative violation of trust and confidence.”


Prof Grogan in addition on page 165 of Dismissal (2002) makes it clear that the “doctrine of common purpose” would find application in cases of this nature. He explains that this concept is derived from criminal law in that it:

“imputes liability for the act of the perpetrator of a criminal act to those who associated themselves with the act before or during its commission”.


In everyday terms according to Prof Grogan this means that:

‘Where those others are found to have actively associated themselves with the result and shared the perpetrator’s mens rea (guilty state of mind), the guilt of the actual perpetrator extends to them by virtue of the doctrine of common purpose’.


Unmistakably, that had been the essence of Mr Khoza’s misconduct on the facts before me. 

Nevertheless cautions Prof Grogan, in order to be successful in a case of derivative misconduct, the employer will have to convince an arbitrator in any case of this nature that the two following ingredients were present. These prerequisites were clearly articulated by the arbitrator at [29] at page 8 of NUM and others / RSA Geological Services, a division of De Beers Consolidated Mines Limited [2004] 1 BALR 1 (P) as:

“. . . first, that the employee knew or could have acquired knowledge of the wrongdoing; second, that the employee failed without justification to disclose that knowledge to the employer, or to take reasonable steps to help the employer acquire that knowledge.”


[See also Employment Law 20(1) February 2004 at 23–24.]

Unquestionably, Mr Khoza had by his own admission known of the theft of the customer’s cellular phone, and despite the existence of a “hotline” never came forward to identify the true culprit. Moreover, there simply seems not to be any “justification” for him not having disclosed this to his employer. Also, no credible evidence of the purported “inconsistent” application of discipline by the employer was ever presented to me.

It has been said that an employee proverbially “bites the hand that feeds him” should he wilfully act to the detriment of the employer that after all, pays his salary. 

The question quite simply has to be asked as to whether this proverbial bite of the employer’s hand by Mr Khoza had been of such a callous and malicious nature to deserve that this caring “hand of the employer” ought never to be extended to him ever again?

Sadly, this appears to be the case. 

 
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 967

One decidedly has some degree of sympathy for the predicament that the applicant finds himself in. Nevertheless, sympathy alone does not remotely detract from the fact that Mr Khoza, whether directly or by association, was intimately involved in an act of dishonesty that was perpetrated against his employer. 

Tip AJ had this to say at [38] in: Standard Bank of South Africa Ltd v CCMA & others [1998] 6 BLLR 622 (LC):

 “It is one of the fundamentals of the employment relationship that an employer should be able to place trust in an employee. A breach of this trust in the form of conduct involving dishonesty is one that goes to the heart of the relationship and is destructive of it.”


Moreover, the Labour Appeal Court in Nedcor Bank Ltd v Jappie [1998] 10 BLLR 1002 (LAC) in a case dealing with dishonesty remarked as follows at:

 “. . . Respondent’s primary – and indeed his only duty – is to serve his employer faithfully, and not to benefit himself or any other person at the employer’s expense.”


This commissioner for one regards a recent decision of the High Court with specific reference to the relationship of “trust” and “honesty” that forms the core of the employer/employee relationship to be in “an elevated class of its own”. Not only does this decision encompass virtually all case law on this topic to date, but it also in a straightforward and uncomplicated manner assesses the very nucleus of the employer / employee relationship.

This decision is found in Carter v Value Truck Rental (Pty) Ltd [2005] 1 BLLR 88 (SE).

It is reflected above that the dismissal of Mr Khoza does indeed to a certain extent create a measure of “sympathy” for the predicament that he finds himself in. Unquestionably Mr Khoza never stole the cellular phone of the customer. Moreover, he came forward “of his own accord”, albeit at a later stage. 

Why Mr Khoza decided to come forward – one will probably never know. Was he in fear that the SA Police would discover that he had known all along of Ms Mashangu’s misconduct and decided to act “pre-emptively” not to be arrested himself? Or, did he do so in a “sudden bout of remorse” for not having disclosed the misconduct at an earlier stage? 

Grogan AJ at [49] on page 101 of Carter (supra) had this to say:

“It may be that in the circumstances the plaintiff’s predicament evokes a measure of sympathy. However, the Labour Court held in the recent judgment (Consani Engineering (Pty) Ltd v CCMA and others [2004] 10 BLLR 995 (LC)) that sympathy is not an ingredient of the test for evaluating the fairness of a dismissal.”


Earlier in this decision at [44] Grogan AJ makes it out-and-out clear that:

“It is trite that, both at common law and under the equitable dispensation created by the LRA, the employment relationship is regarded as one of the highest good faith. . . .The success of any enterprise depends on the absolute integrity and honesty of its employees, and any form of dishonesty or deception that potentially may have more serious and far-reaching consequences . . .“Honesty” in the employment context does not merely mean refraining from criminal acts; it embraces any conduct which involves deceit.”


Mr Mahlangu has argued that the dismissal of Mr Khoza had been “shocking”. Indeed, from his perception that might be so. However, not from the insight that this commissioner has had in the facts of the case before him, and having tested  
[2005] 9 BALR 961 (CCMA) at 968
these facts against numerous decisions of superior courts of which he is compelled to adhere to.

Indeed in: County Fair Foods (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & others [1999] 11 BLLR 1117 (LAC) the court held that where employers have acted fairly in imposing a sanction, commissioners should not disturb it. However, commissioners have a duty to interfere where the sanction of dismissal is substantively unfair to such an extent that it “shocks one’s sense of fairness” as quite correctly argued by Mr Mahlangu. As indicated above however, the sanction of dismissal for the misconduct committed by the applicant does not “shock my sense of fairness” to the extent that I deem myself to be compelled to intervene with the respondent’s sanction of dismissal.

Award
The applicant’s dismissal is upheld as substantively fair.
The applicant’s application for retrospective reinstatement is dismissed.
No order as to costs is made. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	 Also reported at [1994] 12 BLLR 25 (LAC) – Ed.


End of Document