



Morey / SAPS & others [2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban 
Case No: PSSS 189 / 05 / 06 
Hearing Date(s): None Indicated 
Award Date(s): 1 / 05 / 2007 
Bench: L Williams 


Keywords


Labour law — Unfair labour practice — Failure to promote — Arbitration

Mini Summary


In referring a dispute to the bargaining council, the applicant claimed that the respondent had unfairly failed to promote her.

Held that the dispute concerned the existence of an unfair labour practice, relating to promotion.

A promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds, viz that proper procedure was not followed; that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment; or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides.

In the present case, the dispute related to procedural and substantive fairness. The applicant bore the burden of proof and had to prove, for example, that she was overlooked for an unfair reason; that the respondent had failed to adhere to its promotion procedures or policies; that the respondent had relied on irrelevant criteria in making the appointment or that she was a better candidate than the person appointed. It was not, however, sufficient for the applicant only to prove the latter. She also had to show that the respondent acted unfairly in so doing.

Examining the evidence, the arbitrator found no substantive unfairness in the appointment. However, certain procedural irregularities rendered the appointment procedurally unfair. The applicant was awarded 2 months' remuneration as compensation.

 
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 1




Details of hearing and representation

The con-arb took place at the SAPS offices at Servamus Building in Durban on 23 April 2007. The applicant was represented by Mr Van Vollenhoven from SAPU and the respondent was represented by Mr S Govender. The joinder party Z Dludla was served with notice of the hearing but elected not to attend or participate.

Issues to be decided

The applicant claimed that the respondent unfairly failed to promote her to post 7770.

The issue to be decided was thus whether the respondent's conduct in failing to promote the applicant was unfair and constituted an unfair labour practice.

 
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 2

Preliminary issues

It was recorded that the applicant had been promoted to level seven subsequent to her dispute being lodged and thus that the only relief sought was the difference between her salary at level six and the level seven salary she would have earned for the period between the date she believed she ought to have been promoted and the date on which she was in fact promoted. The period in question was ten months and the difference in earnings for that period amounted to the sum of R10 500.

It was further recorded that, given that the applicant was the highest scoring candidate, there was no need for her to lead evidence or compare herself to Dludla, who got the post. In essence the facts were common cause and the only dispute was whether or not the panel were justified in not appointing her based on the requirement that they address employment equity when making appointments.

Background to the dispute

The applicant applied for post 7770, which was a level seven post in Logistics at Ixopo police station (Umzimkulu area). She was the highest scoring candidate on the preferred list but was not promoted and averred that the panel acted unfairly in not recommending her for the post. It was common cause that the panel scored the applicant 21 points and Z Dludla 18 points but that Dludla was appointed on grounds of representivity. The applicant disputed that was a valid basis for her appointment and argued that the panel also failed to justify that decision in their minutes. She noted that whilst the National Instruction 1 of 2004 did permit the panel to prefer EE candidates, those persons had to be "suitably qualified" and Dludla lacked recognisable experience in logistics. In addition, other white and coloured women were promoted in that area and it thus didn't make sense that the applicant was denied the post.

Survey of the evidence

Morris Subramoney Moodley chaired the panel that made the decision in respect of post 7770. The panel was considering a number of posts in that round so they sat down and discussed the National Instruction to ensure they were familiar with the requirements. The other members of the panel were Director Phahla and Senior Superintendent Van Vollenhoven. Superintendent Venketsamy was an HR advisor and a secretary took minutes.

The job description for the post appeared at 1 and required the successful candidate to render administrative support to provisioning administrative officers; administer logistic matters and compile returns. Seven candidates appeared on the long list and three were short-listed. After short-listing, the panel  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 3
perused the applications of the three candidates and scored them. Each panelist scored the candidates individually and they then discussed their scores and reached consensus. It was correct that Dludla scored 18 and the applicant scored 21. Initially Dludla was awarded a score of five in category two and a total of 17 but after a mutual discussion, the panel increased her score to a six, which meant her total was 18. When they went back to her prior learning, they saw that she had some financial experience and they decided to recognise that and put her mark up.

The applicant scored the highest and the panel then looked at the area's equity plan (at 50). According to the profile for that area there were 49 white females in the area and only 14 African females. The goal to be obtained by 2006 was 290 African females and only 41 white females so there was a huge discrepancy. The panel was also given the documents at 52 and 53, which set out the targets. The goal was to increase African females on that level from two to five and reduce white females from six to one. It was thus very clear that they had an excess of white females in that area and the category that needed attention was that of African females. In terms of those targets and clause 12 of the National Instruction, the panel recommended Dludla for the post. They were satisfied that she could perform the job or acquire the capacity to perform it within a reasonable time per clause 12(1)(a) and that she had adequate experience and prior learning to take up the post. The national office endorsed their decision and Dludla was promoted. The National Instruction (at 58) per clause 3(3) specifically recorded that the mere fact that someone was recommended for the post did not entitle him or her to the post.

Moodley was the deputy area commissioner in Umzimkulu area. He managed 31 stations, including Ixopo. Post 7770 was a new post at the station and it included admin duties, financial duties and logistical duties. It involved writing letters and documents for the station commissioner and was a fairly senior post. Logistics was a general term encompassing procurement, databases, fleet management, filing and completing order forms. The successful candidate would provide support to the captain who was the administration officer.

Dludla (at 9) was a station commissioner's secretary and she received a four on her PEP evaluation. At the same time as being a secretary, Dludla worked as a collisions clerk which meant she dealt with the receipting of cash for documentation and the issuing of receipts. She also did filing and composed correspondence. Those duties all fitted in with the job description and they believed she would be able to handle the job. She had been in the service since 1984 although her career history in her application only listed the posts held since 1993. She had the requisite number of years experience to be eligible for promotion. Initially the panel had not recognised her prior learning/training/development but they later went back and saw that some of her training courses were in fact relevant so they changed the form from "no" to "yes" on that criteria. The courses she had gone on were relevant to the work she would have to  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 4
perform so they pushed her mark up from a five to a six. It was true that they ticked the column "no relevant experience" but they believed she would become competent in a reasonable period of time.

The applicant was a provisioning administration clerk grade III. The panel acknowledged that she had the relevant experience and ticked the last column on her part 2, signifying that she had more than four years experience. She had received the highest score but the panel elected not to promote her on grounds of representivity.

When directed to the document handed up by the applicant's representative (at 74), Moodley agreed it appeared to be a record of all the persons who were promoted during the round of October 2004. When asked why other white persons were promoted in that round in KZN (not Umzimkulu area), he said he could not answer for the equity profile of other areas. His area was a separate business unit and he had no knowledge of any white persons being promoted in his area at that salary level. The comparison could only be within the Umzimkulu area. One also had to look at the number of applications and it was quite possible that no black persons applied for some of the posts or that none were short-listed. He distinctly recalled that sometimes only one or two people applied for the posts and that only whites qualified for some of the positions. Three black sergeants had applied for post 7770, for example, but by them moving over to admin and becoming Public Service Act 103(P) of 1994 employees, they would have lost their medical aid and certain allowances. That left only two African females, an Indian male and a white female as candidates for the post. The panel felt that had an obligation to advance the cause of African females.

On cross-examination Moodley agreed the panel had to comply with National Instruction 1 of 2004 and could not deviate from it. If there were an error on the screening process, they would not necessarily make a note to that effect in the minutes. Clause 9 (4) required them to record all the proceedings during the evaluation process but they were not obligated to record issues that had no bearing on the proceedings. All material decisions were recorded in the minutes, which appeared at 2–4 of the bundle. The panel couldn't deal with each issue in the minutes but they made it clear that they addressed the issue of representivity. It was not necessary to specifically state which employment equity plan they used. The panel took into account all the criteria set out in clause 12(1)(d). The only error was that they hadn't recorded it.

Competence was defined per clause 2 as "a blend of knowledge, skills, behaviour and aptitude that a person can apply in the work environment and which are indicative of that person's ability to meet the requirements of the post". Clause 6 set out the minimum requirements to qualify for promotion to salary level seven – namely three years service as a level 6 and Dludla had that. She also had to have a rating of "satisfactory" from her manager, "successfully completed determined course" and was "suitable for  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 5
promotion". Dludla had been promoted to level six on 1 July 1993 according to her application. Moodley couldn't dispute that her persal printout (at 21) reflected her promotion date as 1 July 1991. That was an error.

The post was in logistics which meant the person who was appointed should have competence in the field of logistics. The candidate did not, however, require financial experience directly related to logistics and only needed general financial experience. Logistics was the primary job function and the financial aspect was just an additional general function. Dludla did meet the requirements for the post. Admittedly she was a typist but she had finance experience and the panel was satisfied that she would be able to learn the job within a reasonable time as was required by the definition of "competence" in the National Instruction. The applicant was more experienced but Dludla was competent to take on the job. The applicant was not a suitable candidate in terms of gender equity.

When the panel increased Dludla's score on prior learning, they looked at her career history for that information, not the courses she had done. Courses were only one factor and they were not the "alpha and omega" of their decisions. The change to a six was based on what she had done and what she was doing. She had done correspondence, worked at HRM, dealt with ICD, dealt with complaints and must have received some training to deal with those duties. The applicant had 17 years in logistics and scored seven.

The post was not a designated post but Moodley denied that meant the panel had to regard qualification as the overriding criterion. He was adamant that was just one of the criteria in clause 12 and that the panel also had to look at equity. The issue of representivity was dealt with in the minutes at 2 and 3. Moodley insisted they had dealt with the process fairly.

Equity reports were done quarterly and the report at page 50 was rendered after two months. Moodley denied that it should have been disregarded and said it was the applicable report when the panel sat in October. Venketsamy and Captain Mabhida from HR compiled the document. The figures at 51 were the figures they wanted to achieve by 2006 and at 52 and 53 were an accurate depiction of what the workforce looked like at present. It was not recorded that those documents were part of the process but the panel did rely on them in making their decisions. The area plan had to be aligned with the provincial plan. If the provincial plan showed too many Indian females, the area plan would show that as well. Ideally no Indian or White females should have been promoted in that round in their area. The problem that arose was where there were no alternatives available to them or where only Indian persons applied for the post. In that case they would note it for the provincial panel to consider.

 
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 6

At 56 was a printout of the next round of appointments. Moodley conceded that White and Indian females were promoted in that round but pointed out that it was a separate process. That panel had not met its equity targets but perhaps there were only White applicants for some of the posts. If that were the case, the panel couldn't discriminate against them and had to appoint them.

Moodley confirmed that it was standard practice for deletions on official documents to be initialed and dated. He admitted the panel should have followed that practice when it changed Dludla's score but noted that it wasn't a requirement. The change to her score was documented by rectifying her mark. It was not recorded in the minutes as a decision. Moodley denied that impacted on procedural fairness and said they were trying to be fair to the candidate. He noted that they would have been permitted to advance her even if she scored 14. The panel would have appointed the applicant if she was the only candidate. The panel did contact the sergeants who had applied for post 7770 and they didn't want to continue because they didn't realise their pay would be reduced.

Summary of the argument

Applicant

Mr Van Vollenhoven argued that the minutes were supposed to show what transpired during the process and who said what. Without that, they were not in accordance with the National Instruction. The problem in casu was that the employer didn't put its reasons into the minutes. They also didn't include any reference to the equity plan on which they relied and as such the minutes were invalid. The panel also failed to identify second and third candidates per clause 9. They erred in not detecting the error on Dludla's application relating to the date of her promotion and ought to have disqualified her on that ground. Marks were not tallied correctly on Dludla's part 2 and the panel failed to initial the deletions on her application. The panel also committed an irregularity by contacting the three sergeants who applied for the post and by failing to record that they had done so.

The panel erred in not appointing the applicant on grounds of equity because it was a non-designated post, and suitability was the overriding factor. Had the candidates been closely scored, perhaps one would accept that the employer exercised its discretion to appoint someone else but in casu the scores were vastly different. In addition, the post was in logistics and required the candidate to do procurement and issue job orders. Dludla's finance experience was not related to logistics and she thus lacked the same competence as the applicant. She was a typist and was thus not "suitably qualified" for the post. It was true that the respondent was allowed to set equity targets but the top candidate should not be  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 7
replaced without a fair reason (Bosman / SAPS 2003 (5) BALR 523 (SSSBC)). The only acceptable reason to replace the top scorer was to enhance representivity or because someone else was better.

Moodley claimed the panel relied on the documents at 50–53 but that was not in the minutes. It further made no sense that the applicant was promoted in the second round when the same equity goals applied and it showed there was no rational connection between the employment equity plan and the respondent's decision.

Respondent

Mr Govender argued that the respondent had looked carefully at the post description and believed a specialist was not required. The definition of the job was to render support in administration and logistics. The incumbent would also be required to perform admin duties; keep filing and compile reports and letters. The job description only stated that the person would have to administer finances and logistics and specialist logistic knowledge was not required. Dludla was thus a suitable candidate and, given the equity plan, the panel did not act unfairly in promoting her. The equity report before the panel dealt specifically with public service act personnel and it was clear there was an excess of white females and a deficiency of African females.

Mr Govender conceded the minutes were not detailed but disputed that the existence of proper minutes would have made any difference to the outcome. The minutes did contain the crux of the panel's reasoning and they recorded that they addressed representivity. The panel had applied their mind. It was further conceded that they ought to have signed the deletion and ensured the marks were correctly calculated but that was not a critical error. Mr Govender denied that the panel erred in not consulting with persal and pointed out that they were not permitted to look at outside documents. They were entitled to assume that the candidate's commander had verified the information as correct.

Moodley had insisted Dludla was a suitable candidate and that the panel looked at all the criteria in clause 12, not just equity. His evidence couldn't be disputed and Mr Govender therefore asked that the matter be dismissed.

Analysis of the evidence

In terms of section 186(2) "unfair labour practice" means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving:  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 8
 "(a) Unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee.

The unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee.
The failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."

The applicant's dispute was lodged in terms of section 186(2)(a) and it is trite law that a promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds – that the procedure was not followed properly, that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides (see in this regard Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN10413 and Goliath v Medscheme (Pty) Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 760 (IC); [also reported at [1996] 5 BLLR 603 (IC) – Ed]).

The applicant did not challenge her non-promotion on grounds of discrimination and her dispute related to procedural and substantive fairness. The applicant bears the burden of proof in this regard and has to prove, for example, that she was overlooked for an unfair reason; that the respondent failed to adhere to its promotion procedures or policies; that the respondent relied on irrelevant criteria in making the appointment or that she was a better candidate than the person appointed. It is not, however, sufficient for the applicant only to prove the latter and she must also show that the respondent acted unfairly in so doing (Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA)).

I shall deal first with the procedural challenges and thereafter with the substantive challenge to the post. In so doing, I must assess the versions of the parties as well as the documentary evidence before me.

The applicant did not lead evidence and her version was presented through the documents, the common cause facts and argument – namely that she was the highest scoring candidate and should thus have been appointed.

The respondent's case was put forward by Senior Superintendent Moodley ("Moodley"), who was a reliable witness. He made concessions when required to do so and there was no suggestion he was dishonest or had anything against the applicant. In the premises I accept his evidence.

The procedural complaints raised were as follows: 
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 9
• That proper minutes were not kept in line with the National Instruction 1 of 2004 (clause 9(4)), specifically because decisions were not recorded therein and it made to reference to the employment equity statistics or plan.

• That the panel erred in not realised Dludla had furnished an incorrect date of promotion on her application.

• That they made deletions and alterations to the official documents and failed to initial or date those.

• That they incorrectly tallied up Dludla's marks.

• That they erred in contacting the three sergeants who had applied for the post and discussing with them the change that would occur to their benefits if they took up the job.

• That the panel put equity above the other criteria it was required to consider in terms of clause 9(2) and further that they didn't apply the criterion of equity fairly or consistently.

• That, even if they did rely on the plan put forward in the bundle of documents, it was rendered after only two months instead of quarterly and ought thus to be disregarded.

It was common cause that the policy document governing the posts for which the applicant applied was the National Instruction 1 of 2004. The clauses relevant to this dispute are:

Definitions:

. . .

'Competence' means competence as defined in regulation 2 of the South African police service employment regulations (in terms of that regulation competence is defined as a blend of knowledge, skills, behaviour and aptitude that a person can apply in the work environment and which are indicative of that person's ability to meet the requirements of a specific post).

. . .

'Recognisable experience' means any relevant experience in the service or the public service at the required level.
'Suitability' means the suitability of an employee to function effectively at the next higher post level and may be affected by previous findings of misconduct against the employee, previous convictions of the employee or pending investigations into misconduct or criminal offences allegedly committed by the employee.

. . .

Generic functions of evaluation panels (whether interviews are conducted or not)

. . .

A panel must, in considering the applications for promotion, promote equal opportunities, fair treatment, employment equity and advance service delivery in the service.

. . .

The chairperson of a panel must ensure that written records are kept of all the proceedings during the evaluation process and she or he must sign the record of all the decisions and recommendations of the committee.

. . .

Criteria for selection of candidates
The selection of a candidate must be based on the following criteria:
Competence based on the inherent requirements of the job or the capacity to acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job.
Prior learning, training and development.
Record of previous experience.
Employment equity in line with the employment equity plan of the relevant business unit.
Evidence of satisfactory performance.
Suitability and
record of conduct." 
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 10
Bearing in mind the wording of the National Instruction as well as the documents and the arguments of the respective representatives, I shall consider each complaint in turn.

The applicant's first complaint was that proper minutes were not kept in line with the National Instruction 1 of 2004 (clause 9(4)). Whilst I am inclined to agree that a reading of the documents that constitute the minutes establishes which post was assessed, which candidates were short-listed, what scores they obtained and which candidate was selected, there is a deficiency in the reasoning of the panel. The forms fail to show adequately why and how the panel reached their decision, the method of application of representivity and the reasons for the recommendation of the candidates. The sole basis given for their decision is "to enhance representivity" but that is not properly explained nor is there any reference to the EE plan for the business unit or the rationale behind the averment that Dludla's appointment will "enhance representivity". As such I am inclined to view them as insufficient to constitute full and proper minutes. I therefore concur with the applicant that the respondent failed to comply with the policy in this regard.

The second issue raised was the fact that Dludla stated on her application she was promoted to her current rank on 1 July 1993 when in fact it was 1 July 1991. Mr Van Vollenhoven argued that the panel ought to have uncovered that error and discarded her application. He could not, however, deny that in a paper board the panel must rely solely on the information before them, and could not know that there was an error. In any event, the error itself does not advance Dludla's case and if anything she prejudiced herself but not claiming the additional two years' experience. I therefore do not believe that the panel erred and, even if they did, the error was not material.

Thirdly the applicant challenged the fact that the panel made alterations to Dludla's application form part 2 and did not initial or date those alterations. In addition, the change was not minuted or recorded in any way. Whilst the National Instruction does not require that deletions be initialed, it does require that all decisions be recorded and the decision to increase Dludla's mark thus ought to have been noted in the minutes or at least on her application form itself. The failure to do so could lead to a negative inference being drawn against the panel and it ought to have safeguarded itself in that regard by noting its decision formally. The same principle applies to the tallying up of the marks. Again, it ought to have ensured the marks were correctly calculated and that it recorded the change on the document or preferably in the minutes.

Another procedural aspect challenged was the fact that the panel contacted the three sergeants who had applied for the post and asked them if they still wanted to be considered in view of the fact that, as Public Service Act 103(P) of 1994 personnel, they would lose certain benefits. I believe this was improper conduct on the part of the panel and they ought to have consideration all applications before them as prescribed by the National  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 11
Instruction. In addition, had one of the sergeants wished to continue in the process it would have been most problematic that he/she had direct contact with the panel during a paper board. I therefore concur with Mr Van Vollenhoven that the panel erred in taking it upon themselves to contact these persons. It is neither their role nor their responsibility. It is furthermore imperative that panelists take cognisance of the adage "justice must not just be done but it must be seen to be done". Even if their reasons for contacting the sergeants were sound, their lack of transparency in doing so could result in a perception of irregularity or even bias.

The final challenge was to the fact that the panel put equity above the other criteria it was required to consider in terms of clause 9(2) and further that they didn't apply the criterion of equity fairly or consistently. In this regard the applicant's challenges on substantive and procedural fairness overlap somewhat and I shall deal with the two together.

The applicant's representative put to Moodley that other White and Indian candidates were promoted in that area in the next round and thus that the respondent selectively applied its EE plan. Moodley could not deny this but argued that it was a totally separate process and that he didn't know the reasons the second panel did not apply the EE plan. He did note that he was aware that in a number of instances there were no candidates of other races and thus that the panel may have had no alternative but to appoint a White or Indian person. In that situation one could not find them to be at fault. He was adamant that during the round in which post 7770 was advertised, no White females were promoted.

Moodley's evidence in this regard was not disputed and the applicant produced no evidence that other White females were appointed in this round. The document at 74 does not separate posts by area and level and it is thus difficult to conclude with any certainty that White females were appointed at salary level seven ahead of African candidates of the same or similar caliber. Indeed, the applicant did not explain what other candidates participated in the round of promotions in which she was subsequently promoted or how it was that she came to be promoted. As such I am unable to place much reliance on her argument in that regard.

It appeared to be common cause, alternatively not disputed, that the panel had the EE plan at 50 – 53 with them at the time and that they based their decisions thereon. This was not reflected in the minutes as it should have been but it appears to be the case based on Moodley's evidence. There was some suggestion that we had no way of knowing if indeed the plan was before the panel at the time but, as stated earlier, I have no reason to question Moodley's honesty and as such I accept his version in this regard. In any event, the applicant could offer no evidence to refute his version. There was some suggestion that the plan was invalid because it covered only a two month period instead of a full quarter, but  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 12
Moodley explained that it was the plan that the respondent had at the time of the promotion process and that it did take some time to compile the full quarterly report. His evidence was not disputed nor could the applicant show that the quarterly plan would have differed materially from the plan at 50. In the premises I am happy to accept the status of the documents at 50–53.

It was further not disputed that the EE plan showed that African females were grossly under-represented in that business unit and at that rank, however, the applicant argued that the post in question was not a designated post and thus that the respondent ought not to have applied equity as an overriding criterion. Moodley did not deny that the post was not designated or that the panel used equity as the decisive factor and indeed this was the crux of the respondent's case herein.

Reference was made to the cases of Samuels and SAPS PSSS 1749 and Pelzer and SAPS PSSS 1026 arbitrations conducted by Sean Molony and Richard Lyster respectively. Although they are not binding on me, I hold these arbitrators in high regard. Lyster's award in particular deals in detail with the application of employment equity in non-designated posts and I find myself persuaded by his reasoning. He held that it would be fair to put employment equity ("EE") ahead of the other criteria listed in clause 12 in promotions to designated posts because it was implicit from the respondent's decision to mark a post as "designated" that it specifically wished to address EE in the appointment. The same could not, however, be said for a non-designated post, as it was implicit from the decision to make the post open to all employees that the panel would consider appointing someone who was not from a designated group. In that instance, the decision had to be made primarily on merit and with an equal weighting of the criteria listed in section 12. Any decision that departed from that and preferred EE as the deciding criterion would have to be carefully justified.

I am inclined to agree with Lyster's views and the fact that this was a non-designated post means that the panel would have to show clearly and rationally why they chose to put equity ahead of all the other criteria for selection. I disagree with Mr Van Vollenhoven's argument that the panel is obligated to decide the appointment into a non-designated post on suitability only and agree with Lyster that the criteria must all be treated equally.

Mr Van Vollenhoven referred also to one of my own previous awards on this point, PSSS 302–05/06, in which I found that the panel had acted such as to prefer equity to all the other criteria. The situation is slightly different in casu. In PSSS302–05/6 two African females were appointed ahead of an Indian male who was far more qualified than either of them. Indeed, the respondent's own witness conceded that he had been incorrectly scored and that he was the most suitable candidate for the post. The same cannot be said here. In this matter Moodley was adamant that, whilst the applicant was perhaps the most  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 13
experienced candidate, Dludla was nonetheless a competent and suitable candidate for promotion. He explained that the post was primarily administrative in nature and that, as a secretary and collisions clerk, she would have been able to perform those functions. Admittedly she had little or no experience in logistics but the panel felt she would be able to learn those skills within a reasonable time. The applicant's representative disagreed and argued that Dludla was an inferior candidate to the applicant to the extent that the panel ought not to have considered her suitable. Much was made of the fact that her job title was "typist" and the post was in logistics.

The National Instruction defines competence as the "blend of knowledge, skills, behaviour and aptitude that a person can apply in the work environment and which are indicative of that person's ability to meet the requirements of a specific post". It defines suitability as "suitability of an employee to function effectively at the next higher post level" and it sets the following criteria for consideration in a promotion:

• Competence based on the inherent requirements of the job or the capacity to acquire, within a reasonable time, the ability to do the job (my emphasis).

• Prior learning, training and development.

• Record of previous experience.

• Employment equity in line with the employment equity plan of the relevant business unit.

• Evidence of satisfactory performance.

• Suitability and

• record of conduct.

Moodley testified that he did take those factors into account and that the panel was satisfied that Dlulda was both "competent" and "suitable" as defined in the policy. He noted that the post was primarily one involving administrative support and that they believed she would be able to do that. She had some financial experience and could learn the job as it related to logistics. The applicant could present no evidence that this was untrue or that Dludla was not competent to perform the duties listed in the job description. Whilst she did not have logistical experience, there was nothing before to suggest that was a highly complex function or one she would not be able to learn. Indeed, a perusal of the job description makes it clear that her only role in logistics would be to "administer logistical matters of the station". The rest of the role is primarily administrative and involves things like filing, compiling reports and correspondence, all of which she was doing.

There is evidence the panel looked at Dludla's prior learning, her record of experience, her PEP rating, her conduct and her competence level. I therefore must find that they did apply the criteria listed in clause 12. The panel chose to apply EE as well and it cannot be disputed that on that criterion she far outweighed the applicant, as African females were very under-represented in that area. In my view, though, the panel erred in the manner in which they handled the application of EE in this matter. They ought to have recorded the statistics in proper detailed minutes and they ought to have recorded that Dludla met all the criteria in clause 12, as the applicant did, but that her appointment would have the  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 14
added benefit of addressing employment equity. I further believe (and this view is held by other arbitrators) that the respondent ought to consider weighting the criterion of equity with a proper score in non-designated posts. Had they done so, for example, the applicant might have scored "0" and Dludla "3" and they would then have been equally ranked as number one. In that instance, it would have been far easier for the panel to justify their decision and, what is more, far easier for the unsuccessful candidates to understand why they were not promoted.

As it is, Dludla scored 18 and the applicant 21. Mr Van Vollenhoven argued that it was a vast points difference but I am not inclined to agree. A three point difference suggests that the candidates were not that far apart and, given that Dludla was competent and her appointment would address EE, I do not think the panel erred in appointing her. I totally disagree with Moodley, however, that they would have been entitled to promote her even if she scored 14 and am of the view that, had that occurred, the panel would have had grave difficulty motivating their decision.

John Grogan in the matter of Cullen and Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA) stated that the relative strengths and weaknesses of the candidates could not in themselves prove that the employer committed an unfair labour practice. He noted that commissioners were not intended to take on the role of recruitment agencies and said it was not their function to assess which candidate was best, but rather to ensure that the employer acted fairly in making its selection. The inferiority of the successful candidate was, he found, only relevant if it indicated that a superior candidate was overlooked for some unacceptable reason. This was view was endorsed by the Labour Court in Ndlovu v CCMA and others (2000) 21 ILJ 1653 (LC); [also reported at [2000] 12 BLLR 1462 (LC) – Ed], wherein the court held that it was not sufficient for a complainant to say that he or she was qualified by experience, ability or formal education but rather that the employer's decision to appoint someone else was unfair.

In Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN10413 the issue was whether the respondent's conduct in not promoting the applicant to the position of assistant director amounted to an unfair labour practice. The commissioner assessed the facts and stated that the decision to promote an employee falls within the prerogative of management. He disagreed with the decision of George v Liberty Life Association of Africa (1996) 17 ILJ 1529 (IC); [also reported at [1996] 4 BLLR 494 (IC) – Ed] but supported the finding in Goliath v Medscheme, supra, wherein the court said that, where discrimination is not alleged, the applicant had to show "gross unreasonableness such that would lead to an inference of mala fides" before he could succeed with an unfair labour practice claim.

I do not believe there is any evidence of "gross unreasonableness" in this appointment, and I accordingly find that it was substantively fair. I do, however, have grave reservations about the procedure followed. There were, in my view, material procedural irregularities in the process followed by the respondent in this round of promotions. Inter alia, the minutes were inadequate and did not record material changes the  
[2007] JOL 20109 (SSSBC) at 15
panel made to the documents, or a description of how and why they applied the EE plan. As stated above, they would very easily have been able to justify their reasons for their decision had they taken the time to draft a formal minute and it is quite possible this case would never have been lodged. The applicant was prejudiced by the errors and, whilst she would not have been the successful candidate, I do believe that an award of compensation is justified.

The Act requires me to make an award that is "fair and equitable" and I believe that an amount equal to two (2) months's remuneration would be adequate in this matter. The defects were material but not such that the applicant would have been appointed but for those errors, and cognisance is also taken of the fact that she was promoted some ten months later.

Award

The applicant, Annette Morey, is to be paid by the respondent, the South African police services, and an amount equal to two (2) months remuneration as compensation herein.
Such amount is to be calculated by the parties and paid to the applicant within 21 (twenty one) days from date hereof.
There is no order as to costs.
Appearance:
None Indicated


End of Document