



Pedlar / Performing Arts Council of the Free State (PACOFS) [2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: FSBF 657-21
Date: 13/04/2021
Before: P Venter
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 188A(11) of the LRA
Inquiry by arbitrator — Employee invoking section 188A(11) of LRA to request inquiry by arbitrator on basis of claim that he was being disciplined for making protected disclosure — Employer bound by request because no proof that employee’s disclosure was made in bad faith.
Inquiry by arbitrator — Employee invoking section 188A(11) of LRA to request inquiry by arbitrator on basis of claim that he was being disciplined for making protected disclosure — No requirement that only employer must pay prescribed fee — CCMA having jurisdiction to conduct inquiry. 

Editor’s Summary


After the applicant, the CEO of the respondent, was accused of contravening HR policies and nepotism as a result of anonymous whistle blowers’ reports he referred a dispute to the CCMA to conduct an inquiry under section 188A of the LRA, alleging that he had been targeted because he had made a protected disclosure to the Minister of Arts and Culture. The respondent denied that it had agreed to such an inquiry, claimed that the referral form was defective in a number of respects and that the claim that he was a whistle blower was an afterthought designed to frustrate the intended internal disciplinary process.

The Commissioner noted that the employee had himself completed the part of the referral form to be filled in by the employer and had paid the required arbitration fee. When the LRA was amended in 2015 the heading of section 188A had been changed from a “pre-dismissal inquiry” to “inquiry by arbitrator”. The amended section provided for an arbitrator to inquire into allegations against employees relating to their conduct or capacity. However, an exception was made in section 188A(11), which allows either the employer or the employee to refer a dispute involving allegations of alleged protected disclosures. Although the CCMA rule 34 had been amended to cater for the new section 188A(11), a referral form does not amount to a formal pleading and Commissioners are not bound by them. The payment by the applicant did not deprive the CCMA of jurisdiction.

Turning to the respondent’s contention that the applicant’s claim that he had made a protected disclosure was made in bad faith, the Commissioner noted that protected disclosures are defined in the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 as inter alia one by an employee disclosing information about the unlawful  
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 650
conduct of an employer to his employer or any recognised authority. Such disclosures need not be accurate, but they must be made in good faith. The Commissioner was not persuaded that the applicant’s disclosure had not been made in good faith. This point was also rejected, although the Commissioner held that since he lacked power to interdict the internal disciplinary hearing, the respondent was free to continue with that process.

The CCMA was directed to schedule the section 188A inquiry for hearing.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing and representation
The matter was referred in terms of section 188A(11) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (the “LRA”) and the arbitration date was not available at the time of writing this ruling. 
The inquiry by arbitrator was requested by the employee party in terms of section 188A(11) of the LRA and the employer party subsequently served and filed the current application in terms of rule 31 of the Rules of the CCMA (the “Rules”).
The application was opposed and decided on the papers served and filed by both parties. I deemed it unnecessary for parties to appear as both submitted comprehensive written legal arguments. I therefore dispensed with the application in terms of rule 31(10) as the matter appears to be urgent and required finalisation with as little as possible legal technicalities. 

Issue to be decided
I am called upon to determine whether the referral was defective and whether the CCMA is vested with jurisdiction to determine the dispute. 

Brief background
The employee was appointed as the Chief Executive Officer of the employer during 2019. As a result of a certain anonymous whistle blower report, the employee was accused of certain wrongdoing. It was, amongst others, alleged that the employee contravened internal HR polices and that he was guilty of nepotism. It was also alleged that he misused his position and committed other transgressions. 
The employee was asked to respond to the allegations and he subsequently replied in writing. According to the employer the allegations were in essence admitted and a formal investigation was launched during August 2020. 
A second anonymous whistle blower report surfaced and on 1 September 2020 a decision was taken to institute disciplinary steps against the employee. The employee was suspended from duty on 3 November 2020 and on 17 December 2020 he was served with disciplinary charges against him. 
What then followed was correspondence between the parties in arranging a date for the matter to commence. It should however be noted that the  
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 651
  employer was of the opinion that the matter already commenced on 3 November 2020, when the employee was suspended. 
The employee referred a section 188A(11) application for an inquiry by arbitrator on 12 February 2021 and he claimed that he made a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 (the “PDA”). 
The employer subsequently raised preliminary issues which will be dealt with in this ruling. Both parties submitted comprehensive written arguments and this ruling is merely a summary of their respective statements. 

Survey of arguments

Arguments of employer party
The acting Chief Executive Officer, Moeketsi Meshack Xaba, argued that the referral was defective, that the application was not bona fide and that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to determine the matter. 
Apparently the employee addressed a letter to the Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture on 10 October 2020 and “blew the whistle” on four council members. 
It was then argued that the LRA 7.19 form was defective as:
The employee altered the referral form by writing “employee” on it whereas the employer had to complete that part of the referral form. 
The employer party never granted its consent to the inquiry by arbitrator.
The employer party never consented to jurisdiction and will proceed with an internal inquiry. 
Rule 34 prescribes that an employer party had to pay the necessary fees, but in this instance the employee paid a fee to the CCMA. 
The application of discipline at the workplace remained the prerogative of the employer. 
In the replying affidavit the deponent persisted with the claim that the referral form is a pleading and that the LRA should be adhered to in this regard. 
It was furthermore argued that the employer was unaware of the employee’s alleged protected disclosure when they suspended the employee. It was therefore the employee who misused the PDA when he was faced with discipline. 
The communication made to the Minister did not fall within the description of a protected disclosure as there were certain prerequisites to be met. Regarding certain allegations against a Mr Nogabe, the employee reported that he found an existing forensic report. This was certainly not a protected disclosure as it was already State information and investigated. Mention was then made that a Mr Matlou, a council member, investigated the matter. There was also a complaint against a certain Mr Brijlal wherein mention was made about certain SMS messages that were not attached to  
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 652
  the complaint. These complaints therefore did not fall within the PDA requirements. 
The employee furthermore waited two months before referring the matter to the CCMA and did not act bona fide. The referral in terms of section 188A(11) was in fact an afterthought designed to frustrate the disciplinary process. 
The employee approached the Labour Court on an urgent basis in an attempt to interdict the disciplinary steps pending the section 188A(11) matter. The Labour Court dismissed the application and also found that the disciplinary action commenced on 3 November 2020. It was also mentioned that the chairperson of the internal inquiry dismissed the preliminary point that the section 188A(11) application stayed the finalisation of the internal process. These arguments were also served in front of the Labour Court and there was nothing preventing the employer from proceeding with the internal inquiry. 
As the internal inquiry was to proceed, the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to determine the matter under the auspices of section 188A(11) of the LRA. In the replying affidavit, the deponent argued that the internal hearing should proceed and that the process is not stayed pending the section 188A(11) proceedings. 

Arguments of employee party
The applicant, Arthur Peter Pedlar, stated that the referral was in fact not defective. It was argued that the LRA 7.19 form was merely a document to facilitate the commencement of a process and parties were not bound by it. It was, in fact, not even necessary to complete the LRA 7.19 form and a normal letter would have sufficed. 
The applicant had a statutory right to refer the matter to the CCMA and the consent of the employer was not necessary in terms of section 188A(11). Any reference to a tripartite relationship where consent was a requirement, was therefore ill-placed. 
It was in fact for the Commissioner to decide the merits of the matter and for this evidence would be required. All that was required from the applicant was to make a bona fide protected disclosure. This was exactly what transpired and the latest disclosure was in fact not the only one that was made. There were also previous protected disclosures made and the former chairperson deposed to an affidavit in this regard. 
The applicant gave a lengthy explanation about the merits of the matter and the allegations that were levelled against him. I did not deem it necessary to repeat the arguments in this ruling. 
Section 188A(11) was a mechanism to replace an internal disciplinary hearing and the employer was in fact bound to follow the process. The applicant referred to certain decided matters which will be dealt with hereunder. To proceed with an internal hearing would therefore be a nullity and in contrast with the LRA and decided matters. Section 188A(11) was promulgated for this exact reason and had to prevent costly and lengthy litigation.  
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 653
The disclosure/s were made in good faith and it was for the Commissioner dealing with the inquiry to consider all the merits of the matter. The issue to be decided now was merely whether or not the CCMA had the necessary jurisdiction to proceed with the matter in terms of section 188A(11) of the LRA.

Analysis of arguments

The LRA 7.19 referral form
The employer attacks the jurisdiction of the CCMA and argues that the CCMA lacks jurisdiction as the referral is defective, the disclosure made does not fall within the scope of the PDA and that it was made mala fide. It is also argued that the chairperson of the internal inquiry ruled that the matter will proceed and that the Labour Court has not barred the employer from proceeding. 
I have read the judgement of Mahosi J in the urgent application and not much turns on it. The learned Judge dismissed the application for lack of urgency and she did not really deal with the legal principles of section 188A(11) and the like. In my view she did however raise one aspect that is relevant relating to the date when disciplinary steps commenced namely 3 November 2020.
The first issue to decide is whether the referral is defective due to the fact that the LRA 7.19 was altered by the employee. It is clear that the employee made a change to the LRA 7.19 form as it provides for completion by an employer party only. It is also clear that he has made the necessary payment whereas it is normally the employer party who makes payment. 
The amendments to the Labour Relations Act (“LRA”) and other key employment legislation in 2015 resulted in key changes to the way employers traditionally regulated employment and the manner in which employers are expected to interact with their employees. One such amendment was the amendments to section 188A of the LRA. This section previously entitled “agreement for pre-dismissal arbitration” is now entitled “inquiry by arbitrator”. An inquiry by arbitrator allows for the appointment of an arbitrator at the CCMA, or bargaining council or accredited agency, upon request by an employer to conduct an inquiry into allegations about the conduct or capacity of an employee. Prior to the amendments, a pre-dismissal arbitration could only be conducted with the consent of the employee.
A significant amendment is the introduction of subsection 11. Section 188A(11) provides that, despite subsection 1, where an employee in good faith alleges that the holding of an inquiry contravenes the PDA that employee or the employer may require that an inquiry be conducted in terms of section 188A into allegations by the employer into the conduct or capacity of the employee. Parties in cases involving claims of protected disclosure typically get drawn into extensive collateral litigation that results in the delay of disciplinary enquiries. To cater for this situation the legislature introduced this subsection. The amendment is aimed at reducing the  
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 654
  risk of collateral litigation, including High Court litigation, which has been common in these circumstances. The referral in terms of subsection 11 permits either the employee or the employer to insist upon an inquiry by an arbitrator to determine the allegations into the employee’s conduct or capacity. 
Section 188A(11) of the LRA therefore makes it possible for an employee to apply for an inquiry by arbitrator where such an employee alleges in good faith that the holding of a disciplinary inquiry will contravene the PDA.
Rule 34 of the CCMA Rules reads as follows:
“1. An employer requesting the Commission to conduct an inquiry, must do so by delivering a completed LRA Form 7.19 to the Commission.
2. The employee must sign the LRA Form 7.19 unless the employee has agreed in terms of section 188A(4)(b) to the inquiry in a contract of employment or the inquiry is held in accordance with a collective agreement, in which case a copy of the contract or the collective agreement must be attached to the Form.
3. When filing the LRA Form 7.19, the employer must pay the prescribed fee to the Commission. Payment of the fee may only be made by:
bank guaranteed cheque; or
electronic transfer into the bank account of the Commission.
4. Within seven (7) days of receiving a request in terms of sub-rule (1) and payment of the prescribed fee, the Commission must notify the parties to the inquiry of when and where the inquiry will be held.
5. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the Commission must give the parties at least seven (7) days’ notice of the commencement of the inquiry.
6. The Commission is only required to refund a fee paid in terms of sub-rule (3), if the Commission is notified of the resolution of the matter prior to issuing a notice in terms of sub-rule (4).”
The CCMA Rules have clearly not been amended yet to cater for section 188A(11) of the LRA. The Rules make no provision that an employee may apply and that he or she may pay the necessary fees for the inquiry by arbitrator. In terms of section 115(2A)(i) of the LRA, the CCMA makes its own rules on the forms to be used during certain processes. It is now trite that a CCMA referral form is not a pleading and Commissioners are not bound by them. See Hospersa v PSSBC and others1 as well as CUSA v Tao Ying Metals and others2 in this regard.
The CCMA does not lack jurisdiction due to the fact that the employee signed the LRA 7.19 after he deleted the specific part where an employer normally signs. The LRA 7.19 form simply does not accord with the LRA yet and the employer is rather opportunistic in this regard. The CCMA also does not lack jurisdiction due to the fact that the employee made payment to the CCMA. 
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 655

Nature of the referral
The employer is of the opinion that the disclosure does not fall within the ambit of the PDA and that it was made mala fide. It is argued that the disclosure was not a real disclosure but merely an afterthought after the employee became aware of possible internal disciplinary steps against him. 
The preamble of the PDA recognises the presence of criminal and/or other irregular conduct in organs of State and private institutions, which is detrimental to good, effective, accountable and transparent governance in these entities. The effect of such conduct increases the likelihood of social damage, as well as destabilising the economy. In light of this, the PDA provides a platform in which every employee and employer has an obligation to disclose any criminal and/or irregular conduct in the workplace. In addition to this responsibility to disclose, the PDA also provides that employers have an equal duty to ensure that all necessary steps are taken to protect employees from any detriment, as a result of their disclosure of such information. The PDA thus aims to facilitate a culture wherein whistleblowing in the workplace is done in a responsible manner, which is regulated by substantial statutory guidelines.
In order to qualify for protection, a disclosure made by an employee must be one that is regarded as “protected” under the PDA. Section 1 of the PDA defines a “disclosure”, as the disclosure of information by an employee, regarding any conduct of an employer, or an employee of that employer, which shows that:
“a. A criminal offence has been committed, or is being committed or is likely to be committed;
b. A person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation which they have;
c. A miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur;
d. The health or safety of an individual has been or is likely to be endangered;
e. The environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged;
f. Unfair discrimination is taking place, as contemplated in the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act 4 of 2000; or
g. Any matter related to the above, has been or is likely to be deliberately concealed.”
Furthermore, a “protected disclosure” is not only a disclosure made to an employer but, may include a disclosure made to a legal adviser, Cabinet Member, Public Protector, regulatory body, member of the press, or police official. Section 3 of the PDA states that no employee may be subjected to any occupational detriment by his or her employer on account, or partly on account, of having made a protected disclosure.
An “occupational detriment” includes any disciplinary action, being dismissed, suspended, demoted, harassed or intimidated, being transferred against one’s will, being refused a transfer or promotion, or being otherwise adversely affected in respect of his or her employment, profession or office, including employment opportunities and work security.
It is important to note that a disclosure made in terms of the PDA need not be factually accurate, rather, the disclosure made must be in good faith, and the employee making such disclosure must reasonably believe 
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 656
  that the information disclosed is substantially true. Furthermore, the disclosure may not be made by an employee for the purposes of personal gain.
This is evident in the case of Chowan v Associated Motor Holdings (Pty) Ltd3 whereby the court held that the claimant’s subjective belief that she was being discriminated against was “reasonable” within the meaning of “disclosure” in terms of section 1 of the PDA. Since the disclosure was also made in good faith, it was protected. Furthermore, the Labour Appeal Court in Lou Annedree John v Afrox Oxygen Ltd4 reiterated that an employee need only prove that their belief was reasonable in order for their disclosure to be protected. It was held that a “reasonable belief” does not relate to the reasonableness of the information, but rather the reasonableness of the belief. A belief can still be reasonable, even if the information turns out to be inaccurate. It was held that the onus to prove the accuracy of the information, in order to enjoy protection, would elevate the requirement to a higher standard than that required by the PDA. As a result, such a requirement would frustrate the functioning of the PDA. It is therefore clear that the PDA does not require disclosures to be factually correct, in order for an employee to be protected.
In determining the issue one must have consideration of the case law relating to section 188A(11). On 10 March 2021 Judge Nkutha-Nkontwana delivered judgment in the matter of Peter Jacobs v Minister of Safety and Security and others5. On 10 December 2020 certain police officers were suspended and charges were brought against them afterwards. These officers subsequently approached the SSSBC in terms of section 188A(11) of the LRA and objected against the internal inquiry. Despite the employer raising an issue that the referral came as an afterthought, the court found that section 188A(11) is a mechanism aimed at striking a balance between no action in terms of the PDA and the taking of certain steps. 
The court referred to Nxele v National Commissioner of Correctional Services and others6 and reiterated that the only proper construction of section 188A(11) of the LRA where an employee requests an inquiry by arbitrator, is that the “request is imperious or peremptory”. The court furthermore held that the employer is instructed to take part in the process and to suspend the internal hearing. Moreover, the section also aims at protecting an employee from disciplinary steps, especially to conduct the process independently. 
In the Nxele matter the court specifically held as follows:
“[26] Section 188A(11) was introduced into the LRA consequent to the amendments to the LRA that came into effect in 2015. The object of this 

provision is to avoid disputes where an employee claims that the holding of an inquiry into allegations of misconduct, and suspension pending such an inquiry, breach the provisions of the PDA. The section accordingly permits either party to insist on an inquiry under section 188A with a view to reduce the risk of collateral litigation, including High Court litigation, which had been common in these circumstances. In Letsoalo and others v Minister of Police and others the court has endorsed this explanatory note.

 . . .

[29] In the present case, the objects and purport of section 188A(11) could only be understood within the context of the PDA and an inquiry into the intention of the legislator. The purpose of the PDA is to provide for the protection of employees who make a disclosure which is protected in terms of the PDA. Whilst section 188A(11), as correctly argued by the applicant, aims to strike a balance between taking no action because the person allegedly guilty of misconduct is a whistleblower in terms of the PDA and allowing a disciplinary process, with the safeguard being that the disciplinary process has to be done in a manner that is entirely independent of the employer.
[30] The use of the words ‘despite subsection (1)’ in section 188A(11) clearly shows that the legislature deliberately stripped the employer of its discretion to unilaterally trigger a section 188A hearing, subject to the employee’s consent. At the advent of s 188A(11), employees may ‘require’ or ‘insist’ that the disciplinary inquiry be conducted in accordance with s 188A, termed ‘pre-dismissal arbitration’. The word ‘require’ in s 188A(11), given its ordinary meaning, means to enjoin, oblige, constrain, command, decree, demand, dictate, direct, etc. 
[31] In my view, the only proper construction to be accorded to section 188A(11) is that, where an employee or employer requires a pre-dismissal arbitration in terms of section 188A, that request is imperious. This construction gives effect to the purpose of the legislature which is to provide a degree of protection to employees who make protected disclosures and to avoid parallel litigation, typified in the present case.
[32] Basically, following a s 188A(11) request by the employee, the employer is enjoined to institute a pre-dismissal arbitration in terms of s 188A. The internal disciplinary inquiry that would have commenced and is pending must terminate. It must be emphasised that, since it is the employer’s managerial prerogative to exercise discipline that gets delegated in terms of a section 188A process, the employer remains responsible for referring the request to the relevant dispute-resolution institution and attending to the payment for the services of that institution. This understanding accords with the purpose of section 188A, which is articulately explained in SA Transport and Allied Workers Union and others v MSC Depots (Pty) Ltd and others where the court stated:

‘Section 188A (despite its unfortunate title which on the face of it, assumes the outcome of the arbitration hearing) has as its purpose a means of expediting dispute resolution by avoiding duplication between internal and external hearings. In effect, in terms of a tripartite agreement between the employee, the employer and the CCMA, an arbitrator steps into the shoes of the employer and assumes the right normally considered a sacrosanct element of the managerial prerogative – the right to exercise discipline, including the right to dismiss. The benefit for all is the elimination of the duplication that 

 
[2021] 6 BALR 649 (CCMA) at 658

inevitably occurs when court-like in-house hearings are inevitably followed by an arbitration hearing conducted on a de novo basis.’”

I am not convinced that the disclosure was not made bona fide. As described above, an employee only needs to have a reasonable belief that the disclosure is protected and the argument surrounding that “the disclosure was made as an afterthought” was adequately addressed in the Peter Jacobs matter. It also appears that it makes no difference that the disclosure was only made after 3 November 2020. I am therefore unable to identify any mala fides on the part of the employee and it also appears that there is no personal gain for him. As correctly pointed out, this aspect might be dealt with by the presiding Commissioner when he deals with the merits of the matter.
It therefore follows that the CCMA has the necessary jurisdiction to determine the matter in terms of section 188A(11) of the LRA. 
I do not have any powers to order the stay of the internal proceedings and parties are at liberty to exercise their rights in this regard.

Rule 20
A directive was issued for parties to conduct a pre-dismissal arbitration and to file the minutes thereof in terms of rule 20 of the CCMA Rules. Parties are hereby reminded of the directive. 

Ruling
The CCMA is vested with jurisdiction to determine the dispute in terms of section 188A of the LRA and the matter is to proceed accordingly.
The CCMA is directed to schedule the matter accordingly. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	   Labour Court case number C502/11.
2	 2009 (2) SA 204 (CC) [also reported at [2009] 1 BLLR 1 (CC) – Ed].
3	   2018 (4) SA 145 (GJ) [also reported at [2018] 2 All SA 720 (GJ) – Ed].
4	   Case JA90/15 [2018] ZALAC [reported as John v Afrox Oxygen Ltd [2018] 5 BLLR 476 (LAC) – Ed].
5	   Case number J194/21.
6	   (2018) 39 ILJ 1799 (LC).


End of Document