



CSA obo Nduli / CCMA [2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: H01029-10
Date: 11/10/2010
Before: L Lekale, Commissioner
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Fair hearing — Employer not required to afford employee second hearing before accepting presiding officer’s recommendation that she be dismissed.
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Fraud — CCMA commissioner making false travel claims — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant employee, a CCMA commissioner, was dismissed for fraudulently claiming travel costs amounting to some R42 000. The employee claimed that her superior was aware of some of the false claims and had done nothing, that duplicated travel claims were merely “mistakes”, and that the commission had treated her inconsistently because other commissioners had made similar false claims and had not been dismissed. The applicants also claimed the dismissal was procedurally unfair because the commissioner who conducted the investigation had acted as initiator in the disciplinary inquiry, because he was a part-time commissioner and therefore not an employee of the commission, and because the governing body had not afforded her a hearing before accepting the presiding officer’s recommendation that she be dismissed. The applicants also claimed that the commission had acted unlawfully by giving her less than the notice pay to which she was contractually entitled.

The commissioner found that the respondent had proved the employee guilty of a range of fraudulent travel claims. While employers must apply discipline consistently, they are entitled to take personal circumstances of employees and other relevant facts into account when deciding on penalties for those who have committed similar offences. In the present case, the employee would not have been dismissed had her offences been as slight as those of other commissioners who had lodged irregular travel claims. In the present case, it was also proved that there had been a complete breakdown of trust. The employee’s claim that her supervisor should also have been disciplined was without substance because he had not authorised the false claims and had reported the employee’s fraudulent activities.

The commissioner rejected the claim that the hearing was procedurally flawed. Nothing granted the employee a right to a second hearing by the governing body before it accepted the presiding officer’s recommendation. 

The commissioner also dismissed the claim for additional notice pay on the ground that that particular dispute had not been referred for conciliation.

 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 138

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration hearing was held at Johannesburg over 2 (two) days viz. the 23 August 2010 and the 23 September 2010.
The applicant party was represented by Ms NC Hlaba on the first day of the hearing and by Mr X Nduna on the last day while the respondent employer, on its part, was represented by Mr C Johnson throughout the proceedings.
The proceedings were recorded digitally on, inter alia, Folder A DS 300001 WMA and DS 300002 WMA.
At the end of the proceedings on the 23 September 2010, the parties agreed to submit written closing statements not later than close of business on or before the 30 September 2010.

Issue to be decided
The preliminary question to be determined is whether or not the Commission is entitled, as of law, to determine the question relating to notice pay in the context of the present proceedings regard being had to the provisions of section 74 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act (“BCEA”).
In the event of the aforegoing question being decided in the affirmative, the next enquiry is whether or not the union member was entitled to 3 (three) months’ notice of termination of services in terms of her contract with the employer and if so, the Commission is requested to award her 2 (two) months’ salary in lieu of notice.
The main question to be determined is whether or not the dismissal of the union member, Ms Martha Nduli, was both substantively and procedurally fair with specific reference to the following salient questions of fact and / or law:
Ad substance:

Whether or not the respondent employer is consistent in the application of discipline regard being had to: 

the fact that certain employees, who were guilty of over-claiming in respect of travelling costs, were not dismissed but were issued with final warnings;
the fact that no disciplinary steps were taken against one Mr Haroun Docrat (Docrat), who was the union member’s supervisor at all times material to the charges against the union member, although a report which forms the basis of the allegations against the union member recommended such measures against him;
Ad procedure:
whether or not the respondent employer’s representation at the disciplinary enquiry was in accordance with clause 3.2.1 of its policy which was applicable at the relevant time viz. GB Approved Policy – February 2005;
whether or not, in law and equity, the respondent employer was obliged to call Docrat as a witness at the disciplinary enquiry;
whether or not it was fair for the investigator, who submitted a report which gave cause to the charges against the union member, to serve as a witness and the initiator at the relevant disciplinary enquiry.
In the event of the question in paragraph [7] above being decided in the negative, the Commission is requested, by the union, to award its member retrospective reinstatement without loss of income and benefits.

Background to the issue
The union member was employed as a level B CCMA Commissioner until the 30 April 2010 when she was dismissed following a disciplinary enquiry into allegations of misconduct levelled against her.
Following a suspicion that the union member could have abused the respondent’s subsistence and travel policy, an investigation was commissioned by the respondent around June 2009 to, inter alia, probe her travelling claims.
One Adv Coen de Kock (De Kock) conducted the investigation. He established, inter alia, that the union member claimed and received a total amount of R42 117,54 from October 2007 to the end of March 2009 to which she was not entitled by, inter alia, claiming as if she had travelled from Johannesburg to various satellite offices in the Vaal Triangle and back when, in actual fact, she only travelled between her residence in Meyerton and such offices.
It also emerged during the said investigation that on the 18 March 2008 the union member backdated some of her aforegoing claims to October 2007. The investigation, further, revealed that on at least 11 (eleven) occasions the union member used public transport to or from the relevant satellite offices but claimed as if she had used her own private transport.
It was, furthermore, established during the investigation that the union member in one instance inflated a travelling claim by claiming as if she travelled to Vanderbijlpark when she, in fact, travelled to Vereeniging which is nearer to her residential place.
It was a further finding of the investigation that the union member double claimed in certain instances.
The union member was, eventually, charged with gross misconduct, alternatively gross negligence or gross dishonesty. Adv De Kock served as the initiator at the disciplinary hearing which ensued. 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 140
The findings of the said investigation formed the basis of the charge against the union member and she was found guilty, accordingly.
She felt aggrieved by the dismissal and enlisted the assistance of her union in referring a dispute concerning alleged unfair dismissal to the Commission in accordance with applicable law.
An unsuccessful attempt at conciliation was made on the 8 June 2010, whereafter, the union requested arbitration on the 5 July 2010.
I was, eventually, appointed to resolve the dispute through arbitration.
At the commencement of the arbitration hearing the union party, inter alia, insisted on the claim for notice pay being consolidated with the alleged unfair dismissal dispute despite conceding that:

[20.1] the issue never served before the Commission at conciliation level nor was it mentioned in either the referral form or the request for arbitration;

[20.2] no reference to it is made in the certificate of non-resolution issued on the 8 June 2010.

The respondent party, on the other hand, objected strongly pointing out that the issue in question is not properly before the Commission.
The union member, however, persisted in her claim and specifically requested the Commission to determine the issue of consolidation. A ruling on the matter was, thereupon, reserved for issuing together with the award after finalisation of the hearing.
The union, further, applied successfully, with the consent of the respondent, for the proceedings to be abridged by allowing 1 (one) of its witnesses to testify by way of telephone conference. The said witness could, however, not be found when it was her turn to testify and the union, thereupon, closed its case only to re-open it after the proceedings had been concluded with the respondent’s consent. The relevant witness, eventually, testified through the telephone at a hastily reconvened hearing later in the day.

Survey of evidence and argument
The parties adduced oral evidence and, further, submitted documents by mutual consent as follows:

[24.1] Exhibit “A”:  The respondent employer’s first bundle of documents;

[24.2] Exhibit “B”:  The respondent employer’s second bundle of documents;

[24.3] Exhibit “C”:  Transcripts of an interview between Adv Coen de Kock and the union member, Martha Nduli;

[24.4] Exhibit “D”:  The applicant union’s bundle of documents;

[24.5] Exhibit “E”:  The union’s bundle of documents relevant to the union member’s evidence.

 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 141
Two (2) witnesses testified under oath on behalf of the respondent to, inter alia, the following effect:

[25.1] Coen de Kock:

He is a part-time CCMA Senior Commissioner as well as an admitted advocate and he conducted the investigation into irregular and / or fraudulent travelling claims;
He interviewed the union member who, inter alia, admitted that on at least 11 instances she used public transport but claimed as if she had used her private vehicle;
Exhibit B contains his investigation report and, in his interview with the union member, the latter stated that she only started to claim after she became aware that one Lekau Dibakwane (Dibakwane) was claiming. The aforegoing was, however, not supported by the documents at his disposal which showed the contrary.
He recommended that the union member’s supervisor Docrat be subjected to disciplinary steps due to, inter alia, his laxity in detecting and/or dealing with the irregular travelling claims in question.

[25.2] Ronald Bernickow:

He is National Senior Commissioner: Operations with the respondent employer and currently the Acting Convening Senior Commissioner (“CSC”) for Johannesburg Region;
It is not correct to say that Docrat is being treated differently because:
there is no evidence before the respondent that he was guilty of submitting false claims;
he is the one who blew the whistle on the relevant conduct and, effectively, gave cause to the relevant investigation by De Kock;
The respondent acted fairly and consistently in the matter insofar as all other employees charged and given final warnings such as Mduduzi Khumalo did not face the same charges as the union member;
The outcome of the disciplinary hearing against the union member served before the respondent’s governing body which effected the union member’s dismissal by, inter alia, issuing instructions for implementation;
Commissioners are supposed to be trustworthy.
The union member, Martha Fihliwe Nduli, testified under oath to the following effect, among others:
she was employed with effect from the 1 October 2005 as a full-time commissioner earning R29 916 gross salary per month as at the time of dismissal;
with regard to procedure she feels that the employer did not follow its policy as set out on page 9 of Exhibit “E” in so far as:
De Kock, was not an employee of the respondent but was a part-time Commissioner;
the aforegoing issue was raised at the disciplinary hearing but the chairperson left it to De Kock and warned that it constituted a procedural defect;
although the relevant policy requires the presence of someone from Human Resources at the enquiry there was no one from the relevant department;
she has not received anything from the governing body to show that it resolved to terminate her services;
Docrat, who was central to the respondent’s case, was not called as a witness although he was her senior;
on substance she feels that the dismissal lacked justification and was unfair because:
she did not lodge fraudulent and false claims as all her seniors and supervisors like Docrat were aware of the claims and should and would have stopped the claims if they were irregular;
standard procedures and policy allowed commissioners to claim and even in 2006 they claimed for attending the Vaal Show as if they travelled from Johannesburg whereas they travelled from their respective residences;
everybody claimed as if they travelled from Johannesburg when they, in fact, went straight to the hearing venues and/or satellite offices from their residential places;
she did not make any misrepresentation because she was informed by one Nina Siele (Siele), who was a senior commissioner and her supervisor, that Dibakwane was claiming although he was travelling directly from home to venues and/or offices in the Vaal Triangle;
she did not check with Dibakwane before she claimed but believed that he was correct and knew the relevant policy because he was, in the past, the general secretary of the union for more than 6 (six) years;
she used to have a problem with her car and her husband, who had some way with and knowledge of cars, would drive her to the venue and leave her to travel back by public transport;
she checked out with Docrat who confirmed that there was nothing wrong with her claims in that regard;

(viii) the double claims made were the result of sheer oversight on her part because she used to swop files with one Derrick Helligen, who was also guilty of double-claiming but was allowed to repay the relevant amount and was not dismissed;

she simply forgot that she did not handle the relevant files because the employer’s system did not assist her in that regard;
in instances where she claimed twice for the same item on different dates she simply made a mistake when she typed her claims;
she repaid the relevant amounts of money;
in her view the claims were false but were not fraudulent.
Nina Siele testified under oath over the telephone to, inter alia, the following effect:
she used to be the union member’s Senior Commissioner and, when the need to dedicate a commissioner to the Vaal Triangle arose, she allocated relevant cases to her because she lived closer to the relevant venues and/or offices;
initially claims in respect of travelling to those destinations were not entertained and paid but in February 2009 when she was approving claims she noticed that Docrat had authorised Dibakwane’s claims from Meredale to Vereeniging;
she mentioned the aforegoing discovery in the management meeting and the relevant CSC said that full-time commissioners should be paid and not part-time Commissioners;
she relayed the aforegoing information to the union member and pointed out that Dibakwane was claiming and the CSC has agreed that he may claim;
her understanding was that commissioners in the position of the union member could claim from where they woke up to the venue or satellite offices and back;
it was not correct to claim from Johannesburg to the venue when the relevant mileage was not travelled.
The parties submitted written closing statements as agreed to, inter alia, the following effect:

[28.1] The respondent’s submissions:

Mr Johnson submitted to, inter alia, the following effect:

the dismissal is substantively fair because:
the union member conceded that she claimed as if she travelled from Johannesburg and back when she, in fact, travelled from home;
the union member’s version to the effect that Docrat authorised the submission of the relevant claims is inconsistent with inherent probabilities;
the union member failed to call Docrat as a witness and an adverse inference should be drawn from this failure;
the union member was found guilty on multiple charges which was not the case with the other employees; 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 144
 (b) the dismissal is procedurally fair because:
the dismissal is procedurally fair because:
clear evidence exists to the effect that the governing body considered the recommendations of the chairperson of the hearing and decided to dismiss the union member;
the union member was afforded an opportunity to present her case;
dismissal is appropriate as a sanction and even if the dismissal is unfair it is, according to the Labour Appeal Court, not permissible to reinstate a commissioner found to be dishonest.

[28.2] The union’s submissions:

The union submitted to the following effect, among others:

the dismissal was not only inconsistent but also constituted double jeopardy insofar as:
those who double-claimed inclusive of the union member were made to pay back;
those who claimed for incorrect mileage were issued with final warnings valid for 6 (six) months and, at the time of the dismissal herein viz. 1 April 2010, all those final warnings had expired;
the union member was told by Siele to claim and both Docrat and the CSC Prince Kekana were aware of and sanctioned the practice;
Docrat was not a whistle-blower and should have been charged in line with the recommendations of the investigator;
the dismissal is procedurally unfair because:
the employer failed to follow its own disciplinary policy regarding the appointment of an initiator;
the initiator was both the player and the referee insofar as he was firstly the investigator, the employer’s representative at the hearing and the witness;
the governing body failed to hear the union member when it considered the recommendations of the hearing chairperson in line with section 117 read with section 185 of the Labour Relations Act (the “LRA”) and the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 2006;
the applicant was only paid 1 (one) month’s salary in lieu of notice and is still owed 2 (two) months’ notice pay in accordance with her contractual notice period of 3 (three) months;
retrospective reinstatement is appropriate as a relief. 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 145

Analysis of evidence and argument
The factual and/or legal dispute between the parties is limited to the following when regard is had to the totality of the evidence adduced and the arguments advanced:

[29.1] Consolidation of proceedings in terms of section 74 of BCEA as a preliminary point.

[29.2] Consistency in the application of discipline as an element of substantive fairness.

[29.3] Compliance with policy, legislation and Constitution of the RSA as a matter of procedural fairness.

Consolidation of proceedings:

[30.1] Section 74(2) of BCEA provides for consolidation of proceedings where an employee, who institutes unfair dismissal proceedings in the Labour Court or before the arbitrator, also has a claim for an amount of money owing to him or her in terms of the BCEA under certain conditions.

[30.2] The Commission or the Labour Court only has jurisdiction to determine a claim for an amount of money owing in terms of the BCEA together with a dispute concerning alleged unfair dismissal if all the (3) three conditions or jurisdictional facts prescribed by section 74(2) of BCEA are met or are present.

[30.3] One of the facts or conditions in question is that:

  “(a) the claim is referred in compliance with section 191 of the Labour Relations Act, 1995;” (see section 74(2)(a) of BCEA).

[30.4] In the present matter, the parties are in agreement that the claim for payment in lieu of notice was not referred to the Commission together with the unfair dismissal dispute in terms of section 191 of LRA and never served before it until it was mentioned for the first time at the commencement of the present hearing.

[30.5] It, therefore, follows from the aforegoing that the Commission has no jurisdiction to determine the relevant claim in the context of its unfair dismissal jurisdiction.

Disciplinary consistency:

“[e]very employee . . . be measured by the same standards . . . Discipline must not be capricious” (See SACCAWU & others v Irvin & Johnson (Pty) Ltd (1999) 20 ILJ 2302 (LAC) at 2313C–J [also reported at [1999] 8 BLLR 741 (LAC) – Ed] per Conradie JA).

[31.2] Inconsistency is generally regarded as a manifestation of disparity in the application of discipline with the employer being selective in 

disciplining employees who committed the same or similar infraction or in the imposition of a particular sanction for the contravention of a particular disciplinary rule.

(See generally NUMSA & others v Henred Fruehauf Trailers (Pty) Ltd (1994) 15 ILJ 1257 (AD) [also reported at [1995] 2 BLLR 1 (AD) – Ed]).

“when deciding whether or not to impose the penalty of dismissal . . . in addition to the gravity of the misconduct [to] consider factors such as the employee’s circumstances (including length of service, previous disciplinary record and personal circumstances), the nature of the job and the circumstances of the infringement itself.” 

As correctly pointed out by the disciplinary hearing chairperson, the employer may differentiate on the grounds of, inter alia, the personal circumstances of the employees involved.

(See item 3(4) of the Code and Exhibit “A”).

[31.4] In all the cases cited by the union in support of its contention that the respondent is guilty of inconsistency, the employees involved were subjected to disciplinary action and the sanction was a matter of discretion in the hands of the respective disciplinary hearing chairpersons who, inter alia, most probably took the relevant employees’ personal circumstances into consideration when they imposed final warnings as sanctions.

[31.5] Although the relevant Code has no force of law and only serves as a guideline to employers, I am obliged, as of law, to take it into account when I determine the fairness of the dismissal herein.

(See Moropane v Gilbeys Distillers & Vintners (Pty) Ltd & another (1998) 19 ILJ 635 (LC) [also reported at [1997] 10 BLLR 1320 (LC) – Ed] and section 138(6) of the LRA).

[31.6] It, thus, follows in my view that the respondent was not inconsistent in the application of discipline insofar as all employees involved were disciplined.

[31.7] Even if I am wrong in the aforegoing finding I am satisfied, from available evidence, that:

the charges faced by those other employees mentioned by the union were different from the one preferred against and on which the union member was found guilty;
the union member actually faced one charge of gross misconduct, alternatively gross negligence and further alternatively gross dishonesty;

(See page 1 of Exhibit “E”)

all the assertions set out under the charge and referred to as charges 1 to 9 on pages 2 to 3 of Exhibit “A” are, in fact, the allegations which, in the employer’s case, go to show that the union member is guilty of either gross misconduct or gross negligence or gross dishonesty;
the employer, further, effectively contends in the charge sheet that the union member’s conduct, as per the assertions in question, has led to a complete breakdown of the trust relationship between the parties;
all the assertions against the union member, save for the one listed as number 7 in the charge sheet which was withdrawn at the disciplinary enquiry, have been proved on a balance of probabilities and they are individually and collectively grave enough to render continued employment relationship intolerable in line with the respondent’s contention;
the union member’s case is, thus, distinguishable from the cases of those other employees. It is, further, clear from the evidence of De Kock and Bernickow as well as the e-mail from Docrat viz. page 5 of Exhibit “E” that had the charge against the union member been limited to claiming from Johannesburg and back like other employees involved she would have, most probably, not been dismissed.

[31.8] The evidence of Siele, as correctly and effectively submitted for the respondent, does not assist the union member’s case at all insofar as:

it is to the effect that she told the union member to claim from her place of residence to the relevant venue and/or satellite offices and back and not from Johannesburg when she had not covered that mileage;
it is, further, not to the effect that the union member was informed that Dibakwane was claiming from Johannesburg when he, in fact, did not travel therefrom;
according to Siele she pointed out at the management meeting that Dibakwane was claiming for travelling from Meredale to the venue and back;
what raised Siele’s eyebrows at the time, in my view, was the fact that Dibakwane was lodging claims and being paid for travelling from his residence to the venue and/or satellite offices when the initial intention and position was that he and those in his position, like the union member, were not entitled to claim in those circumstances. 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 148

[31.9] There is no evidence before me to suggest that Docrat was treated differently insofar as:

all the allegations against him do not suggest any complicity on his part in the commission of the misconduct involved herein;
it defies human experience and logic to suggest that he misled the union member with regard to claiming policies only to alert top management to such anomaly when, according to the union member, he was at all material times satisfied and impressed with both her work and her dedication thereto;
Siele’s evidence, further, sheds light on the role he played in the matter to the extent that she testified to the effect that he approved Dibakwane’s claim for travelling from Meredale to the relevant venue/satellite offices and back;
it is, further, not correct to suggest that the relevant CSC countenanced the fraudulent claims when Siele’s evidence is to the effect that her discovery and report to him was that Dibakwane was claiming for travelling from his residence in Meredale to the venue in the Vaal Triangle and back.

[31.10] there existed no excuse for the union member to claim as if she used her car on her way back home when she, in fact, used a public transport. The fact that her husband drove her car back home after dropping her off at the venue or satellite office does not entitle her to claim as if she used her own private transport because she simply did not travel in her car.

Compliance with policy, legislation and constitution:

“should be the accused employee’s direct supervisor where possible, or alternatively an employee with an intimate knowledge of the case at hand.”

[32.2] It is common cause between the parties that the initiator was a part-time Senior Commissioner.

[32.3] It is not disputed by the union that the said initiator had “an intimate knowledge” of the matter because he conducted an extensive investigation on the issues involved and his report formed the basis of the charge against the union member.

[32.4] The relevant policy does not define an “employee” while the LRA and the BCEA are of assistance in this regard.

[32.5] Section 117 of LRA provides for the appointment of commissioners on either full-time or part-time basis.

[32.6] Section 213 of LRA, on its part, effectively defines an “employee” as excluding an independent contractor and as being “any person . . . who works for another person . . . and who receives or is entitled to receive any remuneration; and “any other person who in 

any manner assists in carrying on or conducting the business of an employer”.

[32.7] The BCEA in section 1 effectively defines an “employee” in the same terms as the LRA.

[32.8] Section 200A of the LRA provides that a person who renders service to another is presumed, regardless of the form of the contract, to be an employee if, inter alia:

in the case of a person who works for an organisation, the person forms part of that organisation;
the person has worked for that other person for an average of 40 hours per month for the last three months;
the person is provided with the tools of the trade or work equipment by the other person.

[32.9] There is nothing before me to suggest that a part-time commissioner appointed in terms of section 117 of LRA is excluded from the definition of an “employee”. No evidence whatsoever was adduced to prove the aforegoing. To the contrary, a part-time commissioner assists the Commission, as the employer, in conducting its dispute resolution business.

[32.10] Even if I am wrong in the aforegoing regard, I am satisfied that, on a preponderance of probabilities, the initiator in question is presumed to be an employee on the basis that:

as a CCMA Commissioner he is probably part of the Commission, as an organisation, because the acts and omissions of commissioners are acts and omissions of the Commission, among others;
as a CCMA commissioner he receives tools of trade in the form of, inter alia, recording systems from the CCMA as his employer.

[32.11] There is nothing before me to rebut the said presumption and there is, further, no indication of any prejudice on the part of the union member as a result of the involvement of De Kock.

[32.12] The union, further, contends that its member was entitled to be heard by the governing body before the latter decided to accept and follow the recommendations of the chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry. In this regard the union cited section 117 of the LRA and the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

[32.13] There is, however, nothing in both the Constitution and the LRA requiring the employer to afford employees in the position of the union member such a second hearing. Section 117 of the LRA provides that the governing body may remove a commissioner on the ground of serious misconduct, among others.

[32.14] The union member was found guilty of serious misconduct or gross dishonesty and, in my view, it was not necessary for such a misconduct to be proved for the second time before the governing 

body. There existed a legally recognised or just cause for the termination of the union member’s contract.

[32.15] The union member, further, lamented the absence of a representative of the Human Resources Department at the hearing. There was, however, no evidence of prejudice on her part as a result of this omission. The purpose of this requirement, as correctly maintained by Mr Johnson, seems to be to ensure compliance with rules of natural justice and principles of equity among others. The proceedings seem to have been fair when looked at in the broad perspective.

[32.16] The union submits that the initiator was both the player and the referee. There is, however, no substance in this submission because De Kock was not the chairperson. There is, in my view, nothing wrong in serving as a witness at a hearing and a representative at the same time. The rule of natural justice against being a judge in one’s own cause was observed insofar as the initiator or the investigator was not the chairperson.

General contentions:

[33.1] The union contends that there exists an element of double jeopardy on the part of its member insofar as the final warnings issued against some other employees had expired at the time of her dismissal.

[33.2] The said contention is, with respect, without merit because the union member never received any such final warning and was not subjected to any hearing in respect of the relevant allegations other than the enquiry which resulted in her dismissal.

[33.3] The fact that the union member repaid the relevant amount of money does not, in my view, absolve her from the consequences of the misconduct involved. The respondent would still be entitled to institute civil proceedings against her to recover the money involved even after taking disciplinary and/or criminal steps against her.

[33.4] The union member, further, complained that Docrat was not called as a witness and, as such, she could not subject him to cross-examination.

[33.5] There was, however, no duty on the respondent to tender Docrat’s evidence where his evidence would not have taken the matter any further. The employer did not rely on Docrat to prove its case. Had it been necessary for the employer to call him as a witness, failure on its part to do so would simply have prejudiced its case. There is, in my view, no obligation, both in law and equity, on a party to call a witness solely for the purpose of placing such a witness at the mercy of the adversary for ridicule, crucifixion or purposeless cross-examination when the evidence of such a witness is not necessary. 

 
[2011] 2 BALR 137 (CCMA) at 151

[33.6] On behalf of the respondent, Mr Johnson submitted that the union should have called Docrat and failure, on its part, to do so should be visited with the drawing of an adverse inference against the union member. In the light of the findings made in respect of the merits of the matter, it is, in my view, not necessary to make a finding on this issue.

[33.7] If I am wrong on this aspect of the matter, I am, in any event, satisfied that good cause exists for drawing an adverse inference against the union because the union was under the duty to call Docrat as a witness and it failed to do so when Docrat was available to testify. The union member expressly declined to call Docrat as a witness.

(See S v Teixeira 1980 (3) SA 755 (A) [also reported at [1980] 2 All SA 292 (A) – Ed]).

[33.8] The aforegoing prevails because the union member relied on and cited Docrat as having authorised her actions in claiming as if she used her own car when she, in fact, used public transport. Docrat was her senior and normally, when a subordinate has checked with her senior and secured permission her actions, even if wrong and unlawful, are less deplorable and attract less moral turpitude.

When all is said and done, I find no fault with the dismissal.
The parties do not seek an award of costs against each other and I find no cause, in equity, to make such an award because of, inter alia, the genuine, but mistaken belief, which the union member had that her case was similar to those of other employees such as Khumalo and Helligen. Her case is, however, distinguishable in that it had the features of the cases of both Khumalo and Helligen and its own unique features viz. claiming as if she used her own private transport when she had used public transport.

Award
In the premises, the dismissal is both substantively and procedurally fair.
I make no award as to payment of costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above judgment:


End of Document