



Roos v Commissioner Stone NO & others [2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC)
Labour Law Reports

Division: Labour Court, Johannesburg
Case No: JR2981/04
Date: 09/05/2007
Before: GN Moshoana, Acting Judge
Keywords


Application in terms of section 145 of the LRA
Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration — Arbitration award — Review — Commissioners not bound to have regard to portions of record of disciplinary proceedings not referred to in evidence.
Protected disclosures — Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 not protecting unsubstantiated and disparaging remarks about employer.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was dismissed for insolence by her then employer, South African Airways (Pty) Ltd. She referred a dispute to the CCMA. The arbitrating commissioner ruled the dismissal fair. On review, the applicant sought to impugn the award on a range of grounds, including the contention that the commissioner had ignored the evidence of a witness who had testified in the disciplinary hearing, but not in the arbitration proceedings.

The Court noted that commissioners are required to make decisions on material properly before them. While the record of the disciplinary proceedings may have been placed before the respondent commissioner, he was required to have regard only to those portions referred to by the parties in evidence. A party may not rely in review on such portions of evidence led in earlier disciplinary proceedings as may suit them then argue that the commissioner had erred by not having regard to it. Commissioners must have regard to the basic rules of evidence. The Court held further that, in any event, the evidence did not suggest that the applicant had not behaved in the manner alleged.

To the extent that the applicant had relied on the claim that her conduct fell under the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000, the Court held that her statements were not protected because they had not been made bona fide. They were nothing more than unsubstantiated and disparaging remarks about her employer. Furthermore, she had rejected an opportunity to prove her claims.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Moshoana AJ:

Introduction
This is a review application brought in terms of section 145 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“LRA”). The grounds upon which the review application was brought were: 
[2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) at 973
 (a) The commissioner misconstrued the nature of the enquiry in the arbitration proceedings. It is evident from the “Analysis of evidence and argument” at 4 of the award that the commissioner grappled with the terms insolence and insubordination. The applicant was neither charged with, nor dismissed for insolence or insubordination. Convenience sake, a copy of the charge sheet is attached hereto, marked Annexure “B”. There was no basis on the evidence before the commissioner for the findings.
The commissioner misconstrued the nature of the enquiry in the arbitration proceedings. It is evident from the “Analysis of evidence and argument” at 4 of the award that the commissioner grappled with the terms insolence and insubordination. The applicant was neither charged with, nor dismissed for insolence or insubordination. Convenience sake, a copy of the charge sheet is attached hereto, marked Annexure “B”. There was no basis on the evidence before the commissioner for the findings.
The commissioner ignored the applicant’s evidence.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the nature of the third respondent company, being an organ of State. He failed to apply his mind to the constitutional imperatives of transparency and efficiency. It is common cause that applicant raised concerns regarding the tender procedures being followed or not followed in awarding a tender to Mazwai Communications in a team meeting some five months prior to being confronted with allegations of misconduct relating to applicant having raised these concerns. The commissioner failed to distinguish between defying authority and raising concern.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the identity of the employer and the identity of the complainant against applicant. The complainant, Ms Quata was not the applicant’s employer, but a senior member of staff, who, on third respondent’s own version, demanded that she wanted applicant to “admit that she is a malicious rumourmonger”, and only after applicant failed to make such admission, pursued disciplinary action against applicant. It is pointed out that the commissioner recorded this as “mischievous rumourmonger”.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the fact that said Ms Quata, on her own version, had a bone to pick with applicant and was in a position of authority to orchestrate a witch hunt. The Honourable Court is referred to paragraph (iii) at 4 of the award.
) The first respondent totally ignored the written heads of argument by the applicant, a copy of which is attached hereto, marked Annexure “C”.
The first respondent failed to consider the probabilities on the evidence before him, according to the rules of evidence, but capriciously made findings.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the third respondent’s failure to call key witnesses and to make negative inferences from same.
The charge sheet which contain the alleged misconduct have been drawn up in the widest possible terms and does not specify times, places, persons, dates etc. The charges were clearly trumped up. The commissioner also failed to properly consider this when weighing the probabilities on the evidence before him.
The first respondent could not reasonably have made the award if he carefully interpreted the evidence before him. 
[2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) at 974
The award is not justifiable in terms of the reasons set out therein or in terms of the evidence during the arbitration hearing.
The commissioner made gross errors of fact and gross errors of law.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the appropriateness of dismissal and consequently the substantive fairness of the dismissal. He failed to apply his mind according to the guidelines, contained in Schedule 8 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995.
The commissioner failed to apply his mind to the procedural requirements for a fair dismissal.

  At the hearing of the application, Mr Du Toit, appearing for the applicant, submitted that the first respondent only made a finding of guilty in so far as the misconduct set out in two which read as follows:

Gross misconduct and unbecoming conduct in the following respects, in that:
You have attempted to undermine SAA and members of its senior management.
You have made disparaging remarks and displayed a negative and aggressive attitude in a meeting that was called with you, your manager and other senior SAA personnel, specifically to address your concerns and allegations, all of which, have been of a very serious nature.
After the factual position was explained to you in order to dispel any misunderstanding, you might possibly have had regarding the procumbent of the Mazwai Communications contract.
You assumed an arrogant, disrespectful and aggressive attitude maintaining that you did not accept the word of SAA and its managers, refused to retract your statement/allegations and thereby implying that they are being wrongful in attempting to set the record straight.
He argued that the first respondent was wrong in his finding that the applicant was guilty of insolence. He argued that the evidence of one Mokhondo at the disciplinary inquiry should have been considered by the first respondent. Had he considered such evidence which was placed before him, he would have arrived at the conclusion that the applicant is not guilty of insolence; so went the argument.
He further submitted that the first respondent was duty bound to look at the evidence of Mkhondo. He argued that arbitrations are not hearings de novo. He cited the case of De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd v CCMA & others [2000] 9 BLLR 995 (LAC) as authority to that submission. Further, he argued that the first respondent, despite the fact not being argued before him should have found that Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 applied. The applicant made a protected disclosure within the contemplation of the said Act. At the end, he argued that the award be reviewed and set aside and be substituted with an order that dismissal was unfair and reinstate the applicant. He argued that costs should follow results. 
[2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) at 975
Mr Malan appearing for the third respondent differed with the submissions made by Mr Du Toit. He also agreed with the proposition that costs should follow results.

Findings of the court
For reasons that shall follow hereunder, the court finds no basis upon which the conclusions and findings of the first respondent could be faulted. Dealing with the issue of the evidence of Mkhondo, the court finds no support in the De Beers matter for the proposition that arbitration hearing is not a hearing de novo (Gibb v Nedcor Ltd [1997] 12 BLLR 1580 (LC)).
Nothing in the arbitration record reflects that the evidence of Mr Mkhondo, as tendered at the disciplinary hearing, was admitted as common cause. Neither is there any indication that the contents of the record of the disciplinary inquiry were admitted without further question. The said Mr Mkhondo was not called as a witness by the applicant at the arbitration proceedings. It seems that Mr Du Toit, using the test developed since the Carephone decision,1 confuses the statement of “material properly before him” with a statement material before him.
It may well be that the transcript of the disciplinary hearing was placed before the first respondent. But that does not mean including it in the bundles, without making reference to it and, in addition, not complying with the rules of evidence, such is properly before the first respondent. More often than not, parties at arbitration would prepare voluminous bundles and only refer to a portion thereof to advance each other’s case.
It is certainly inappropriate for a party in a review application to simply argue that the portion I wish to rely on, which I submit the commissioner ignored, formed part of the bundles and the commissioner was bound to look for it and find that it suits a party’s case.
Much as section 138(1) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 states that a commissioner may conduct the arbitration in a manner that he/she considers appropriate with the minimum of legal formalities, that does not suggest that, being lumped with documents, a commissioner must ignore the basic rules of evidence regarding proof and find a document that tends to support a case of the other party. In my view, such conduct is certainly a reviewable conduct to say the least.
Nonetheless, having looked at the evidence of Mkhondo at the disciplinary hearing, I find nothing to suggest that the applicant did not behave in the manner in which the third respondent alleged and actually proved she did. All that he said was the following:

“My feeling is that she was adamant, adamant with what she believed in.”

  Mr Mkhondo only expressed his feeling. In his view, the conduct complained of simply suggested being adamant to what the applicant believed in. That being the opinion of Mkhondo, the first respondent was not  
[2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) at 976
  bound by it. He had all the powers and the know how to conclude that the conduct of the applicant amounts to insolence. Accordingly, there is no merit in this ground.

There is no way, in the court’s view, that the conduct of the applicant would be protected by the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000. The disclosure was not bona fide. She turned down an opportunity to be clarified. In my view, it is not the purpose of the Act to give licence to employees to make unsubstantiated and disparaging remarks about their employers and later hide behind the Act. Besides, this point was not argued before the first respondent. Mr Du Toit argued that he should have just speculated that the Act is applicable to the applicant. In any event, that Act defines “protected disclosure” to mean:
Disclosure made to:
A legal adviser in accordance with section 5.
An employer in accordance with section 6.
A member of cabinet or of the executive council of a province in accordance with section 7.
A person or body in accordance with section 8.
Any other person in accordance with section 9, but does not include disclosure:
In respect of which the employee concerned commits an offence by making that disclosure.
Made by a legal adviser to whom the information concerned was disclosed in the course of obtaining legal advice in accordance with section 5.

  Section 9(1) provides that a general protected disclosure is any disclosure made in good faith by an employee:

who reasonably believes that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it are substantively true; and
who does not make the disclosure for purposes of personal gain, excluding any reward payable in terms of any law.
In this matter, the evidence was overwhelming before the first respondent that the allegations are far from being substantially true. The applicant spurned an invitation to verify that her allegations are not true. That being so, how can she be seen as bona fide? In any event, the real reason for her dismissal is her insolent behaviour displayed in the meeting of 30 June 2005, and not what she disclosed to Mkhondo in March 2005. There is no merit to this submission.

Conclusion
The court finds nothing wrong with the award. In fact, the award is well reasoned and is supported by evidence properly placed before the first respondent. 
[2007] 10 BLLR 972 (LC) at 977

Order

Accordingly, I order as follows:

The application is dismissed with costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above judgment:


Footnotes
1	  Reported as Carephone (Pty) Ltd v Marcus NO & others at [1998] 11 BLLR 1093 (LAC) – Ed.

For applicant:
Mr Du Toit
For respondents:
Mr Malan


End of Document