



S v Dawjee and others [2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC)
All South African Law Reports

Division: Western Cape Division, Cape Town
Case No: CC45/2015
Date of Judgment: 19 February 2018Date of Sentence: 10 May 2018
Before: R ALLIE J

Notes

For Criminal Law see:• LAWSA Third Edition (Vol 11, paras 1–412)

• Snyman CR Criminal Law 6ed Durban LexisNexis 2008 (updated in 2014)

For Criminal Procedure see:• LAWSA Second Edition (Vol 5(2), paras 174–388)

• Hiemstra’s: Criminal Procedure issue 11 Durban LexisNexis May 2018

Keywords


Criminal law and procedure — Corruption — Corrupt activities involving a public officer — Elements of offence as set out in Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act 12 of 2004 discussed by court.
Criminal law and procedure — Corruption — Defeating or obstructing the course of justice Fraud — Sentencing — Principles of sentencing restated by court.

Editor’s Summary


The accused were charged with counts of racketeering in contravention of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act 121 of 1998, corruption, fraud, contraventions of the Firearms Control Act 60 of 2000 and money laundering. Underlying the charges was an allegedly corrupt relationship between the civilian accused (the “first to third accused”) and those accused employed in the police service (the “fourth to sixth accused”).

During the course of the presentation of the State’s case, a trial-within-a-trial was held to determine, inter alia, the fairness of the trial with specific reference to whether the surveillance of the accused by the police was lawful. Before the conclusion of the trial-within-a-trial, the first to sixth accused decided to change their pleas on some of the counts from not guilty to guilty and to make certain admissions in terms of section 220 of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of 1977. The State chose to accept the pleas in terms of section 112(2) of the latter Act and the court, after having already considered the evidence led to date when it was presented with the change of pleas, accepted the pleas and convicted the relevant accused on their pleas.

Reasons for the conviction of the relevant accused on the counts to which they pleaded guilty as well as the reasons for the acquittal of the relevant accused on the counts for which they sought acquittals were now furnished in the present judgment.

The Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act 12 of 2004 is the main statute setting out the law applicable to the offence of corrupt activities involving a public officer. Section 4(1)(a)(i)(aa) describes the offences in respect of corrupt activities relating to public officers. Section 4(1)(b) deals with misconduct by the corruptor which can take the form of either direct or indirect gratifications. That sub-section goes on to describe the element of intent that must be present. The elements of the offence of corrupt activities relating to public officers are as follows. There must have been an offer of or actual gratification given to a public officer. Such gratification must be given for the purpose of moving the public officer to act in a manner that amounts to the unlawful exercise of or the failure to exercise his duty, functions or authority, and contemplates an improper act or omission ie unlawfulness. The said act  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 817
must be designed to achieve an unjustified result (this is the element relating to intention).

In casu the civilian accused all admitted in their plea of guilty, that they provided the fourth to sixth accused with gratifications. The latter were public officers at the time they received those gratifications. They admitted in their pleas that they received the gratifications from the first three accused. It was admitted by the civilian accused that they had provided the gratifications for the purpose of obtaining assistance or preferential treatment for the first accused, and that their acts had the effect of unjustifiably preferring the first accused.

The court turned to deal with the remaining counts on which the accused pleaded not guilty and for which an acquittal was sought before setting out the convictions and acquittals handed down in respect of each of the accused.

Held – In considering an appropriate sentence, the court must strive to attain the primary objectives of sentence which are, inter alia those of deterrence, rehabilitation, where possible and retribution. Account must be taken of the accused’s personal circumstances, the nature and circumstances of the offences and the consequences of the commission of the offences. A balancing exercise is required, serving the interests of the accused and the interests of justice. The court first looked at the personal circumstances of each of the accused in this matter considering the nature and circumstances of the offences. The fourth to sixth accused were officers in the police service (“SAPS”), and the court expected their knowledge and understanding of the offence of corruption in general to have been sufficiently detailed because each of them held senior leadership positions in the SAPS at the time they committed the offences. Despite that, they did not believe that receiving financial assistance from the first accused and according him favours or preferential treatment in their capacity as police officers, constituted corruption. Their conduct involved the exercise and abuse of public power, and the court emphasised that such power must be exercised responsibly, for the benefit of society as a whole and in accordance with the prescripts that define how that power is to be exercised.

The conduct of the first accused was such that he used SAPS resources for his own personal benefit. The court rejected his defence that the fourth to sixth accused were merely expected to do their official duties and in so doing, they were not being asked to act unlawfully. The authorities make it clear that it is an offence to bribe an official to do his duty and it is a crime for an official to accept money in return for doing his duty.

The sixth accused was liable to be sentenced in terms of the prescribed minimum sentence provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 105 of 1997 because he was a law enforcement officer and he received gratifications in excess of R10 000. However, the court was persuaded that the ordinary mitigating factors applicable to him weighed against the role he played and the nature of the offence, constituted substantial and compelling circumstances to justify a deviation from the prescribed minimum sentence. The mitigating factors were considered by the court in the personal circumstances of each of the accused had to be weighed against the aggravating factors. In so doing, the court formed the view that correctional supervision would not send out a sufficiently strong signal of deterrence and sanction nor would it facilitate the accused’s recognition and acceptance of responsibility for the severity of the  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 818
offences. Direct imprisonment was found to be warranted, and was imposed on each accused according to his specific circumstances, as reflected in the court’s eventual order.





Cases referred to in judgment
At the inception of the trial, the State alleged that the accused are guilty of the following main charges:
During the course of the presentation of the State’s case, a trial within a trial was held to determine, inter alia, the fairness of the trial with specific reference to whether the surveillance of the accused by the SAPS was lawful.
Before the conclusion of the trial within a trial, accused 1 through to 6 decided to change their pleas on certain counts from not guilty to guilty and to make certain admissions in terms of section 220 of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of 1977. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 821
The State chose to accept the pleas in terms of section 112(2) and the court, after having already considered the evidence led to date when it was presented with the change of pleas, accepted the pleas and convicted the relevant accused on their pleas.
The State and defence brought an application to separate accused 7, who had not changed her plea, from the remaining accused but the court refused the application on the grounds that no actual prejudice to accused 7 was found to exist.
The State and the defence brought an application for the acquittal of accused 7 on all counts that she had been charged with and an acquittal of accused 1 through to 6 on all counts that they had not pleaded guilty to.
The court considered the application for acquittal.
This judgment contains the reasons for the conviction of the relevant accused on the counts to which they pleaded guilty as well as the reasons for the acquittal of the relevant accused on the counts for which they sought acquittals.

Law applicable to cases in which a plea is changed after evidence has been adduced
In S v Brown 2015 (1) SACR 211 (SCA) at [94] [also reported at [2015] 1 All SA 452 (SCA) – Ed] the Supreme Court of Appeal held as follows:

“Change of plea during a trial

More than 25 years ago in S v Mokhobo 1989 (1) SA 939 (A), this Court had occasion to consider s 112 of the Act, in relation to it being applied both at the commencement of proceedings, as well as after the state has led evidence and an accused has then elected to change his plea from not guilty to guilty. At 943D – E the following appears:

  ‘Artikel 112 vind normaalweg toepassing wanneer ’n beskuldigde by die aanvang van ‘’ verhoor skuldig pleit. Daar is egter niks in die artikel wat spreek teen ‘n aanwending van die bepalings daarvan indien ’n beskuldigde wat aanvanklik onskuldig gepleit het sy pleit wens te verander nadat die Staat getuienis begin lei het nie – mits, natuurlik, die aanklaer bereid is om op daardie stadium ’n pleit van skuldig te aanvaar. Dit mag dan egter nie nodig wees om die beskuldigde te ondervra, of vir hom om in sy verklaring erkennings te maak, aangaande elemente van die misdaad wat reeds deur getuienis bewys is nie.’”

The court in S v Sethoga and others 1990 (1) SA 270 (A) at 275C–E [also reported at [1990] 1 All SA 292 (A) – Ed], found that a court has the duty to determine the issues raised by the accused’s initial plea of not guilty:

“The prosecutor cannot interfere with the exercise of that duty and compel the court”.

In Brown’s case the Supreme Court of Appeal held as follows at [102]:

“Having regard to the authorities referred to above, Veldhuizen J was obliged, when the plea was tendered, to consider whether the plea ought to be accepted, with particular regard being paid to the effect of the evidence led up until that stage.”

At paragraph 103, the court in Brown found that:

“In deciding on an appropriate sentence, the court below ought not to have restricted itself to bare facts contained in the plea. The tendered plea does not 

 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 822

provide enough context nor does it present enough of a picture for the court to properly fulfil its sentencing function. . . no regard can be had to evidence inconsistent with the plea.”

In conformity with the view expressed in the paragraph above, the relevant evidence is summarised and evaluated for the purpose of taking account of the context it provides and to demonstrate why the court accepts the pleas of guilty, where applicable and how the court arrives at its decision concerning the remaining charges on which pleas of not guilty have been entered.

Summary of evidence led
Warrant Officer Wynand Wessels, the forensic investigator’s relevant testimony is as follows:

  Concerning accused 4:

A cheque of R20 000 drawn on the account of accused 1 made payable to accused 4 was eventually deposited into an African Bank account of accused 4 by way of internal bank credit transfer on 3 December 2011;
A further cheque of R7000 drawn on accused 1’s bank account made payable to accused 4 was deposited into accused 4’s ABSA bank account on 7 February 2012;
From 27 April 2012 to 1 May 2012, accused 4 lived at Soeteweide Guest House and he incurred costs of R3180 which was paid by accused 2;
On 12 December 2012, a cash cheque drawn on the bank account of accused 2 for R15 000 was deposited into a Standard Bank account of accused 4;
R2000 cash was deposited into the bank account of accused 4 with the reference “Mr Dawjee” on 5 January 2013;
On 12 July 2013 a Mercedes Benz was rented by accused 4’s daughter, Dominique, for R10 149,30 from Cabs Car Hire and the amount was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 19 August 2013, a cash cheque of R10 000 drawn on the bank account of accused 1, was deposited into a Standard Bank account of accused 4;
On 3 September 2013, an amount of R4000 was paid on the Truworths account of accused 4 which was from the First National Bank credit card of accused 1;
On 3 September 2013, an amount of R4195 was paid on the Markhams account of accused 4 from the First National Bank credit card of accused 1;
The total amount of financial benefit allegedly received by accused 4 from either accused 1 or from one of the business entities controlled by accused 1 is R75 524,30;
Of the amount of R75 524,30 mentioned above, R54 000 were cash payments/cheque deposits; 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 823
  Concerning accused 5:
Accused 5 declared in a financial disclosures form, a golf sponsorship by accused 2 to the value of R4000;
On 11 May 2013, petrol in the amount of R697,10, was filled into a motor vehicle owned by accused 5 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at the petrol station;
On 16 June 2013, petrol in the amount of R704,25, was filled into a motor vehicle owned by accused 5 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at the petrol station;
On 22 June 2013, petrol in the amount of R673 was filled into a motor vehicle owned by accused 5 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at the petrol station;
On 6 July 2013, petrol in the amount of R478,65, was filled into a motor vehicle owned by accused 5 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at the petrol station;
On 15 July 2013, petrol in the amount of R771,60, was filled into a motor vehicle owned by accused 5 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at the petrol station;
The total value of the alleged benefit to accused 5 as outlined above, is R7324,60 of which R4000 is a declared golf sponsorship and R3324.60 is for petrol;

  Concerning accused 6

On 28 February 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R3643,73, which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 27 July 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R1352,15, which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 13 August 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R1493,04, which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 7 September 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R1352,20, which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 18 September 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R2004,10 which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 3 December 2012, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R3754,25 which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 4 April 2013, a motor vehicle was rented by accused 6 at a cost of R955,50 which was charged to the account of accused 2;
On 25 June 2013, petrol in the amount of R516,85 was filled into a vehicle owned by accused 6 and debited to the account of accused 2 held at a petrol station; 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 824
 14.27 On 4 July 2013, a Renault Clio motor vehicle, valued at R167400,20 was registered in the name of accused 2 but it bore the registration number “ KIRSH WP” and it was used by Kirshia Govender, the daughter of accused 6 and 7;
On 24 August 2013, Mango Flight tickets valued at R2218 for Kirshia Govender was paid from the First National Bank credit card account of accused 1;
On 4 October 2013, petrol in the amount of R468,05 was filled into the Renault Clio and debited to the account of accused 2 held at a petrol station;
On 10 October 2013, a Mango flight ticket valued at R1325 for accused 6 was paid from the First National Bank credit card account of accused 1;
A Toyota Tazz motor vehicle’s registration was transferred from the name of Kirshia to the name of accused 2 on 5 July 2013;
Over the period 21 November 2011 to March 2013, accused 1 paid for maintenance of the pool at the home of accused 6 and 7 in a total amount of R5777;
The total value of the benefit to accused 6 is calculated at R192,260;
The benefits received by accused 6 and 7’s daughter and the pool maintenance at the joint home of accused 6 and 7 were apportioned equally between accused 6 and 7;

  Concerning accused 7:

On 24 February 2012 a cash deposit of R3000 was made into her Nedbank account with a reference bearing accused 1’s name.
On 7 June 2012 a cash deposit of R5000 was made into accused 7’s bank account bearing a reference with accused 1’s name.
On 30 November 2012 a cash deposit of R3000 was made into the bank account of accused 7 bearing a reference of accused 1’s name.
On 2 January 2013 a BMW 3 series car with a contract value of R490 919 was registered in the name of accused 7 with accused 1 signing as surety and co-principal debtor. accused 1 also arranged for the payments for the vehicle to be deducted by debit order from his bank account.
On 14 March 2013 a cash cheque to the value of R10 000 drawn on a bank account of accused 1 was cashed by accused 7.
On 22 March 2013 a BMW 5 series vehicle with a contract value of R669 001,66 was bought on the name of accused 7 with accused 1 signing as surety and co-principal debtor and authorising the payments for the vehicle to be deducted by debit order from his bank account.
On 14 April 2013 a motor vehicle to the value of R955,50 was hired by P Govender, the son of accused 6 and 7 and the amount for the hire was charged to the account of accused 2. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 825
On 25 May 2013 petrol to the value of R760,25 was put into a vehicle owned by accused 7 at a petrol station and it was charged to the account of accused 2.
On 14 June 2013 petrol to the value of R672,35 was put into a vehicle owned by accused 7 at a petrol station and it was charged to the account of accused 2.
On 25 June 2013 petrol to the value of R725 was put into a vehicle owned by accused 7 at a petrol station and it was charged to the account of accused 2.
On 25 June 2013 petrol to the value of R516,85 petrol was put into a vehicle owned by accused 7 at a petrol station and it was charged to the account of accused 2.
On 4 July 2013 a Renault Clio to the value of R167 400,20 used by accused 6 and 7’s daughter was used registered in the name of accused 2.
On 24 August 2013 Mango flights for accused 6 and 7’s daughter to the value of R2218 was paid from accused 1’s credit card account.
On 29 September 2013 petrol to the value of R300 was put into a vehicle owned by accused 7 at a petrol station and it was charged to the account of accused 2.
On 4 October 2013 petrol to the value of R468,05 was put into a vehicle driven by the daughter of accused 6 and 7 at a petrol station and charged to the account of accused 2.
During the period October to November 2013 the maintenance of the pool at the home of accused 6 and 7 was paid for by accused 1.
The total value of the benefits to accused 7 amount to R1360 713,86.
For the period 4 January 2013 to 30 September 2013 accused 7 paid accused 1 R91 000 ostensibly for the debit orders of the vehicles.

  Cross-examination of Wessels

It was put to him that accused 4 had cash with which to pay his clothing store accounts but because accused 1 was with him, accused 1 wanted the cash and paid the stores with his credit card. The witness could not deny that.
It was put to him that it was absurd to suggest that accused 5 would perpetrate corruption for meagre amounts but the witness could not comment on that allegation.
Wessels agreed with accused 5’s legal representative that the prescribed form used for the disclosure or registrable interests did not make provision for the disclosure of loans or liabilities.
It was put to Wessels that accused 6 and 7 are relatives of accused 1 and he could not dispute it. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 826
Wessels could not dispute that accused 6 and 7’s son was not financially dependant on them and was 26 years old at the time when accused 2 paid for a vehicle hired by him nor could he challenge the proposition that accused 7 didn’t know about it.
Wessels agreed that accused 6 and 7’s daughter was an adult at the time when the Renault Clio vehicle was purchased for her. He couldn’t deny that Kirshia entered into an agreement with accused 1 and 2 for the purchase of the vehicle and sold her Toyota Tazz to accused 2.
Wessels could not dispute that accused 6 paid Alphera Financial Services for the balance of Kirshia’s motor vehicle.
He didn’t dispute that accused 7 re-paid accused 1 for the instalments he caused to be made on the vehicles initially.
Wessels admits that the Toyota Tazz owned by Kirshia was transferred to accused 2.
It was put to Wessels during cross-examination that he is not an auditor, which he admitted, nor independent. He denied that it is unusual for an independent auditor not to be used in a case of this kind.
Wessels could not dispute the proposition that is also contained in accused 7’s plea, that the BMW vehicles were bought by accused 7 but were for the benefit of accused 6.
He couldn’t dispute that accused 7 was not aware that petrol for the BMW vehicles were paid by accused 2 because the vehicles were driven by accused 6.
He conceded that the BMW 320 was traded in and replaced by the BMW 520 and accused 7 didn’t have the two vehicles simultaneously.
It was also put to him that it was incorrect to apportion the total contract value of the vehicles purchased by accused 7 as a benefit but he said that he believed that but for accused 1’s assistance, accused 7 and her daughter would not have been able to obtain vehicles to that value, hence he apportioned the full contract value even though the vehicles remain under the ownership of the finance company concerned until it was full paid up.
He admitted that the schedule to the indictment contain certain payments for pool maintenance that are duplicated for accused 6 and 7.
He couldn’t dispute the proposition that payments to the value of R21 000 made by accused 1 to accused 7 were made prior to transfer of the Toyota Tazz to accused 2, but in compensation for the Toyota Tazz.

Brigadier Thiruvasigi Hansraj formerly Asaram
This witness was the alleged whistle-blower. She was the station commander of Goodwood Police Station when she allegedly uncovered cause for concern about the behaviour of the accused. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 827
As part of her liaison duties towards local business persons in the area of Goodwood Station, she met accused 1 after he allegedly requested to meet her.
Accused 1 told her to ensure that officer Theunis is given a better vehicle. He also invited her to his home for breakfast. He said that accused 6 and 7 as well as Lennit Max would attend but she declined the invitation.
On 14 February 2012, while she was on leave she received a call from Lt Col Vlok who was distressed because accused 1 asked him to provide feedback on a docket involving the alleged illegal possession of a firearm by a young man who was driving with his deceased father’s firearm in his vehicle and was arrested. accused 1 allegedly used foul language while threatening to harm a certain Capt Engelbrecht in a telephonic conversation that he was allegedly having with accused 5, who was the cluster commander in that area.
Capt Engelbrecht approached the witness to complain about the rude behaviour of accused 1. The witness advised her to either open a complaint docket or speak to accused 5 since accused 1 was allegedly speaking to accused 5 at the time. Capt Engelbrecht spoke to accused 5.
The suspect in the illegal possession of a firearm docket is Dillon Chetty who accused 1 said was his nephew. He alleged that he was granted permission by accused 6 to bring the firearm to Goodwood SAPS so that it could be destroyed. The witness explained that the normal procedure was not to expect an unlicensed member of the public to bring the firearm to the police station but police officers would instead fetch the firearm themselves. The case against Dillon Chetty was eventually withdrawn because the ballistics expert who had to testify couldn’t be found.
On 20 February 2012 accused 1 arrived at the Goodwood Police Station and asked to speak to the witness. He told her that he was there because the provincial Inspectorate of the SAPS was coming to do an inspection of that station because it’s the most racist station. He said that his brother, Colonel Naidoo would form part of the inspection. She was astonished that a civilian had so much insight into a SAPS inspection. As it subsequently transpired, the inspection was postponed to 22 February.
She told accused 1 that she received a complaint about him being abusive towards Colonel Engelbrecht. Accused 1 became angry and demanded that Colonel Vlok come to the witness’ office immediately. He said he wanted to f. . . up Col Vlok. Accused 1 was breathing heavily and looked somewhat ill. Her secretary brought accused 1 a glass of water. accused 1 wanted to call accused 4 to say that he was going to be late for a meeting and asked the witness to call accused 4. She dialled the number and then gave the phone to accused 1. Accused 1 told accused 4 that he should remember the discussion they had that weekend about Goodwood SAPS and also said he would fetch accused 4’s daughter. Accused 1 asked her to call accused 5 but he didn’t answer his phone. Then he asked her to call accused 7 which she did. He spoke to accused 7 and so did the witness. accused 7 asked her to give accused 1 sugar water, to escort him to his car and to calm him down as he was diabetic. The witness indeed calmed accused 1 down and saw him leave the building but he returned later. She was surprised to see him again but he wanted feedback on the firearm case  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 828
  of Dillon Chetty. accused 5 walked into her office with accused 1. She called Col Vlok and the branch commander, Col Izaks to provide feedback. In the docket she found a statement signed by accused 6 in which he said that accused 1 called him about a deceased person’s firearm that he wanted to have transferred onto the name of the son of the deceased. accused 6 allegedly told accused 1 that the son should hand the firearm into the police for destruction. She called accused 5 aside and told him about how accused 1 insulted Col Engelbrecht. She went back into her office where accused 1, Engelbrecht, Izaks and accused 5 were all present. accused 5 told the witness that she called the meeting but she didn’t call a meeting with accused 1 but did so with accused 5. Accused 5 began reading from the firearm docket to accused 1. Accused 1 asked Vlok why he had carried tales to the witness. He accused Vlok of being racist and telling lies. Vlok became tearful. Vlok felt uncomfortable because accused 5 didn’t stop accused 1. Accused 1 received a phone call and he said that it was from accused 4. He complained to the person on the phone about Goodwood SAPS. Then he said he would pick Dominique up and he would see accused 4 later at dinner. Vlok took out his firearm and placed it on the table. He told accused 5 that he could transfer him anywhere, while crying. The witness asked Col Izaks to accompany Vlok out of her office. The witness told accused 1 that his behaviour was incorrect. Then only did accused 5 also tell accused 1 that his behaviour is wrong and he should leave.
Later after she thought accused 1 had left, he returned to her office for a third time while holding his arm around a crying Vlok. Accused 1 said he had apologised to Vlok and he kissed Vlok and said there was no case going to be made. Accused 1 looked comfortable as though he was in his terrain and Vlok looked uncomfortable and flushed.
After accused 1 left her office for the third time, he met Capt Engelbrecht on the stairs, who didn’t greet him. accused 1 came to her office for a fourth time to complain that Engelbrecht didn’t greet him. By then she was tired and told accused 1 that she would deal with it later.
On 24 February 2012 accused 5 asked the witness to attend a meeting at accused 1’s shop as it’s a meeting with business people regarding crime in the area. When she arrived at accused 1’s shop, she was told that accused 5 was in accused 1’s office with him. She found accused 5 relaxed on a couch drinking cappuccino and there were no other business people present. accused 1 said that the meeting was about crime around his premises. She produced statistics which showed that was no high crime incidents in that sector. The police strategy was to deploy patrol vehicles in the geographical blocks that were crime hotspots. accused 5 said that the witness must explain the strategy to accused 1, which she did but accused 1 became irritated. accused 1 said that the witness must inflate the statistics so that there could be more patrols around his business. accused 5 also explained the strategy to accused 1. Accused 1 said that certain police members must be transferred. The witness said that the meeting is becoming out of order and that she was going to excuse herself from it. She stood up. Accused 5 didn’t complain about her wanting to leave. accused 1 complained and said she had no respect for accused 5. accused 1 said that accused 5 should be more like accused 7 and accused 4. She walked  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 829
  out followed by accused 1 who showed her missing drain covers and belaboured his complaints. She told him she’ll step up patrols if he has concerns about drain covers being stolen.
Later accused 1 called her to apologise for his behaviour because his wife asked him to do so.
Accused 5 called the witness while she was on her way to a meeting to tell her that there was a burglary at accused 1’s business premises and accused 1 complained of poor service delivery by Goodwood SAPS.
She later discovered that accused 1 had not reported the burglary but his secretary had called the Goodwood station, asked for the witness, who was not in and hung up without reporting the burglary. She arranged telephonically for a vehicle to go out to the premises of accused 1. Later accused 1 called the witness to say that accused 4 told him to instruct the witness herself to come out to his business. She explained that she was in a meeting but accused 1 wasn’t happy. She sent Capt Dickerson to accused 1. After her meeting she asked accused 5 whether she should still attend at accused 1’s business premises and he said that she should. She didn’t believe it was necessary because police policy was to give priority to armed robberies and murders first and not burglaries. She nonetheless went to accused 1’s business. She was told that the burglar alarm wasn’t on at the time of the burglary and the cameras were not working either. No inventory was kept of the stock but she was told that approximately one million rand’s worth of stock was stolen.
On 20 March 2012 there was an armed robbery at a business called Fish 4 Africa. She received a report from Warrant Officer Wilson to the effect that while she was attending the crime scene, accused 1 arrived and opened fridges and potentially contaminated the crime scene. Wilson claimed that accused 1 was aggressive.
Accused 1 invited the witness to lunches and places where other senior police officers would attend but the witness declined the invitations. Accused 1 called her a cheeky Indian woman with an attitude.
It bothered her that accused 1 expected preferential treatment and appeared to have so much influence and knowledge in the police force.
Under normal circumstances she would have approached the cluster commander and the Provincial Commissioner of Police about her concerns but because accused 1 appeared to have a cosy relationship with them, she couldn’t approach them.
In her first encounter with accused 1 he told her that members of Goodwood SAPS came to his business to fit tow-bars and for favours and that he helped an officer whose house had burned down. The witness told accused 1 not to entertain police members.
She decided to register her concerns about accused 1 and his relationship with accused 4, 5, 6 and 7, the expectations he had of preferential treatment and his behaviour in an Inquiry Docket which she opened and registered with Col Izaks. She didn’t mention the names of accused 4 and 5 in the docket because she didn’t want to expose them then. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 830
That same evening after she registered the inquiry, accused 5 called her and asked what the inquiry was about. She told him that she’s not at liberty to discuss it with him. Sergeant Jaftha, who is now accused 5’s wife, was then working at the detective branch of Goodwood SAPS.
The following day the witness wasn’t at work. She gave a report to Major-General Mathope. She wanted to know what he was going to do with the information because she felt that she couldn’t trust anyone. He said that he would take it to Pretoria Head Office.
When she returned to work, she was warned to back off by Brigadier Solomons. She felt alone because she couldn’t trust senior officers and junior officers wouldn’t come forward for fear of being victimised.
On 28 August 2012, her husband, to who she wasn’t yet married at the time, Colonel Hansraj told her that there was a plot to discredit her with false accusations made by one, Nadeem, who sold cell-phones and who alleged that she took cell-phones from his business.
She arranged to meet Nadeem to discuss the allegation. He didn’t arrive at the meeting place. Then she received a call from Mrs Dawjee, accused 1’s wife and that is when she discovered that Nadeem was at accused 1’s business premises. When she arrived at accused 1’s business with Colonel Gouws, Nadeem was sitting there fearfully while accused 1 spoke abusively to him. Nadeem said that the witness took nothing from him. accused 1 threatened to beat him up. accused 1 said he thinks that Nadeem knew of the conflict between the witness and accused 1 and tried to impress accused 1 by making false accusations against the witness.
On 10 September 2012 the witness met Mrs Dawjee and her son Zameer at their request. They were unhappy about a search and seizure operation that had taken place at second accused’s business premises. accused 1 arrived late at the meeting. He said something about being a member of PAGAD but the witness didn’t respond. It was put to her during cross-examination that accused 1 said he was an affiliate of PAGAD. accused 1 said that Crime Intelligence was part of the operation and he implied that that only happened because her fiancé, who is now her husband, works for Crime Intelligence.
She denied that she leaked the fact of the investigation of this case to the media and said that the media could have heard about the search and seizure operation.
She received a Prestige award for excellent work performance for 2012 to 2013 because Goodwood wasn’t an under-performing station and it in fact performed quite well.
According to the witness police management didn’t take her inquiry seriously initially. Instead, accused 4 caused police under his command to harass her by holding repetitive inspections at the Goodwood Police Station. She endured duplicate inspections by the Police Inspectorate and by the Auditor-General. Goodwood Police Station was belatedly included in a Project 21 which was designed to assist police stations that were struggling with high crime statistics although Goodwood wasn’t in need of assistance and so it became Project 22. When she queried why Goodwood Police station was included in the Project, accused 5 told her at a meeting  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 831
  that the reason why it was included was because of all the businesses in that area that dealt with second hand goods. General Jacobs informed her that Goodwood Police Station was added to the project. He was accused 4’s deputy at the time. People who formed part of the Projects were first selected for training and she wasn’t part of that selection initially.
She begged the police management, including those to who she reported the inquiry, for feedback but it took a long time before she received any feedback. She was shunned by police leadership because she dared to open an inquiry that implicated accused 4, 5, 6, and 7.
She eventually met with General Matakatha who actually ensured that her inquiry was investigated. General Matakatha introduced her to Colonel Enus, the investigating officer in this case.
The witness lodged 4 grievances about the harassment she experienced after reporting the inquiry but it didn’t receive satisfactory attention. She lodged the second grievance because she wasn’t happy with the result of the first grievance. That caused further victimisation. General Jacobs suggested she enter into mediation but she wasn’t satisfied with the outcome. The officers who dealt with her grievances worked under the command of accused 4 such as General Jacobs, Brigadier Solomons, accused 7, Colonel Buffels, General Burger and General Van Wyk. There was a need to lodge the third and fourth grievances because the first and second grievances were not adequately addressed and so the harassment escalated. She receive feedback only that her fourth grievance was sent to the National Commissioner of Police. She received no correspondence confirming receipt of her grievance from the National Commissioner’s office.
She believes the successive inspections were designed to divert her attention away from the complaints that she had lodged in the inquiry docket and she said that is how accused 4 misused his power.
She said that accused 1 used the tactic of speaking to accused 4 or 5 on the phone in the presence of other police officers to show that he was connected and he had money and power.
Officers at Goodwood Police Station noticed a man parked in a car outside the station for some hours. They asked him what he wants and he said that he wants to see the Indian lady and he was sent by accused 5. She later discovered that he was a notorious gangster. She believes his visit was an act of intimidation.
While she was on sick leave, a Colonel Daniels was sent to sit in her office. She was compelled to remove her belongings from her office although she was only booked off for a short while.
She confirmed during cross-examination that accused 5 did also reprimand accused 1 when he spoke rudely to Vlok.
She admitted that she didn’t hear accused 4 speak to accused 1 on the phone when the latter held out that they were speaking to one another.
During cross-examination, she readily conceded that throughout the harassment that she alleged she experienced after she registered the inquiry, she didn’t avail herself of the mechanisms available in the Protected Disclosures Act. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 832

Colonel Vernon Vlok
He first met accused 1 in 2007 when he was arranging sponsorship from business people for the police soccer team. Accused 1 sponsored meat for an event of the soccer team.
accused 1 regularly complained about police members and about his businesses’ drain covers being stolen so he attended at accused 1’s business premises from time to time.
He went to accused 1’s business premises on 14 February 2012 with Warrant Officer Theunis. accused 1 was very upset and shouted over a courier service that arrived late. He told the witness that the service delivery at Goodwood Police Station was poor and he alleged that Captain Engelbrecht is a racist. accused 1 then allegedly used foul language to describe how he was going to harm Engelbrecht. Accused 1 then referred to Engelbrecht’s husband who is a Lt Col and said that it is easy to have him transferred. He spoke as though he had the authority to have police officers transferred. accused 1 said he would call the provincial commissioner, i.e. accused 4 but he wasn’t available and then accused 1 called accused 4’s driver, Danie. He asked the driver whether they received the food and whether they ate well. He also spoke about tyres that had to be fitted to a vehicle. The witness could hear the person on the other side of the line laughing when asked whether they ate well. accused 1 then said he was going to call accused 5 who was the Bellville cluster commander at the time. He used some name on accused 5 and then he told him about Engelbrecht and how he wanted to harm her. He once again used foul language when he mentioned Engelbrecht. At that point the witness stood up and walked outside because he found it offensive. accused 1 followed him outside and he told accused 1 that he shouldn’t speak about his fellow officers that way in his presence. The witness climbed into the car which Theunis drove. As they arrived at the police station, he noticed some t-shirts on the back seat of their car. He pleaded with Theunis to return the t-shirts because he realised that accused 1 had given it to Theunis. He informed Capt Engelbrecht and the station commander, Asaram (who subsequently married and became Brigadier T Hansraj) about what accused 1 had said.
On 20 February 2012, while sitting in his office, accused 1 walked in and said he’s waiting for the police inspectorate to do an inspection at the Goodwood Police Station and accused 1 said that he’s brother was part of the inspection.
He found it peculiar that a civilian would know about an internal police inspection because it had nothing to do with the public. There was an inspection scheduled for later that week but not on that day.
At approximately midday on that same day Asaram called him to her office. He found Izaks, Asaram, accused 5 and accused 1 in the office.
Accused 1 said he had a complaint against Warrant Officer Nortje concerning an investigation of illegal possession of a firearm. He alleged that the witness was also involved but the witness said that he wasn’t part of that investigation. Accused 1 threatened to bring a civil claim against the police. Accused 1 then said that he didn’t say the derogatory things  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 833
  about Engelbrecht that the witness alleged he had said. The witness told the meeting verbatim what he heard accused 1 say. During cross-examination, it was put to this witness that both accused 1 and accused 5 deny that those words were uttered. Accused 1 angrily alleged that the witness is corrupt and he is a pig. Accused 1 loudly reprimanded the witness for having told Engelbrecht what accused 1 said about her. He intimidated the witness. accused 1 said that the witness and Engelbrecht must be separated. The witness didn’t feel well especially after accused 1 said that he must die. He was upset that accused 5, his cluster commander sat silently by and allowed accused 1, a civilian to speak to him that way. He took out his firearm and placed it on the table and said that he could be transferred anywhere. He went to his office and closed the door. Izaks followed him in and said accused 1 ought not to have spoken that way. The witness was crying. Approximately 10 minutes later accused 1 came into the witness’ office, kissed him on the left side of his head and said he was sorry. The witness walked to Asaram and told her that accused 1 had apologised. Later accused 1 asked him out for coffee but he declined.
The next day accused 1 called him again and said he must come take down a complaint against Engelbrecht but the witness didn’t go to accused 1.
On 16 May 2012, accused 1 called the witness about drain covers that were stolen. Accused 1 said that accused 5 suggested that he call the witness. He sent Warrant Officer Roman to accused 1.
On 25 January 2012, when it was National Police Day, accused 5 had organised a big walk from Bellville to Goodwood Civic Centre. Station commanders were seated in the hall as well as accused 1. Later accused 1 confronted the witness and asked him why he left the meeting early when people still wanted to ask him questions. He explained that his mother became ill. He couldn’t understand why he had to explain his absence to accused 1. He made a statement for this case.
He was challenged during cross-examination on how he could have heard the voice on the other side of the telephone line when accused 1 purported to be speaking to accused 5. The witness said he heard the sound of accused 5’s voice on the other side of the line.
He admitted that he couldn’t hear what the person on the other side of the line was saying.
The witness explained during cross-examination that Theunis wasn’t present throughout the conversation between accused 1 and himself on 14 February 2012.
He denied that accused 1 called him to his business premises on 14 February 2012 to complaint about cases he made of stolen drain covers and other acts of vandalism that the police failed to keep a record of. He could not recall the purpose of his visit on that day but he also explained that accused 1 often complained in general terms and expected preferential treatment for his complaints and he wanted extra patrols around his business but the witness believed all people should be treated the same. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 834

Colonel Deidre Engelbrecht
She received a report from Vlok about what accused 1 said about her. Her duties included doing the grids, planning the areas of operation and setting aside focus areas for crime prevention.
She felt humiliated and embarrassed by what Vlok told her.
On 20 February 2012, she didn’t greet accused 1 when she saw him walk out of Asaram’s office.
She was questioned concerning accused 1’s allegation that when the police fail to record the correct crime statistics, certain areas would not receive adequate patrols. She agreed that that could happen but she didn’t believe that it happened at Goodwood Police Station.
She agreed that the statement that she made was given to Asaram and it wasn’t commissioned in her presence and the date on which it was commissioned appears to be incorrect.

Captain Wayne Barry Theunis
He was the communication officer and media liaison at Goodwood Police Station. He met accused 1 who gave the police a donation when they had a fun run to raise funds. Asaram became the station commander in 2009. During her tenure, there was only one occasion when accused 1 was asked to donate for a Mandela Day celebration where accused 1 donated heaters. Asaram later stopped all donations from anyone to the police. He recalled that accused 1 complained about his drain covers being stolen but he didn’t want to lodge a formal complaint and provide a statement. He remembered one occasion when he accompanied Asaram to accused 1’s business and they had a meeting inside while he waited outside. When they came out, accused 1 told Asaram that she must give the witness a new car. It did strike him as strange that accused 1 involved himself so much with police matters.
The witness confirmed that he accompanied Vlok to accused 1’s business on 14 February 2012. He heard accused 1 say Goodwood Police Station is the most racist; that Colonel Engelbrecht was a racist and she allegedly only provides overtime for her friends. accused 1 said he was going to call the provincial commissioner, then his driver and finally accused 5, the cluster commander.
He heard accused 1 refer to accused 5 as a “boesman” on the phone. The witness felt uncomfortable about the disparaging words that accused 1 used when speaking about Engelbrecht and the derogatory word he used on accused 5, hence he stepped outside the business premises of accused 1 and waited outside for Vlok. Accused 1 and Vlok later walked outside and accused 1 showed Vlok where some trees were stolen. Accused 1 gave the witness two golf t-shirts but when Vlok saw the t-shirts, he said that the witness should take them back but he felt too embarrassed to do so.
He first provided Asaram with a handwritten statement which was then typed and he later signed the typed statement.
He explained that if a businessman wanted more patrols, that would be acceded to only if the business is in a hot spot area where a number of crimes have been reported. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 835
He couldn’t explain why his statement wasn’t commissioned.

Warrant Officer Elsabe Nortje
Stationed at Goodwood for past 9 years. She became the investigating officer in the illegal possession of firearm case. She liaised with the prosecutor who provided guidance concerning the matter. The suspect was working in Johannesburg and failed to appear in court. She asked the court to issue a warrant for the arrest of the suspect. The firearm in that case was sent to Ballistics for testing. The firearm’s serial number coincided with that of a firearm belonging to someone who lived in Pretoria. She believed she couldn’t charge a suspect if the serial number belonged to a firearm in the possession of its lawful owner. She discussed the issue with the prosecutor and the case was withdrawn. The firearm was sent for destruction at the request of the wife of the deceased owner. She said that she would normally give feedback on the progress of a docket to the complainant. Accused 1 wasn’t the complainant and he wasn’t entitled to receive feedback. Accused 1 didn’t approach her for feedback nor did the suspect contact her for feedback.
She typed a statement for Captain Dickenson who was her superior.
She couldn’t understand why accused 1 complained about the investigation of the case because the outcome was to the advantage of the suspect.
She understood that accused 1 had threatened a civil action and there was an internal departmental inquiry about the conduct of the investigation. She told Asaram that the case was withdrawn because there was a problem with the serial number. She did so even before accused 1 lodged a complaint.
She only saw accused 6’s statement in the docket when she prepared to testify in this case.

Warrant Officer Wilson
She was a detective who attended a robbery crime scene at Fish 4 Africa, a business in Goodwood. She was busy taking statements, speaking to the fingerprint expert and photographer. The interior of the shop had been cordoned off to enable the police to locate fingerprints and to take photos. She heard a commotion and found accused 1 leaning on a fridge, asking for his fish. He was touching the fridge and contaminating the scene. She asked him a few times to leave but it took a while before he left because he insisted on being given his fish order. Accused 1 asked her if she didn’t know who he was and she said that she didn’t. She later established who accused 1 was. She was upset with the officers who cordoned off the scene because they allowed accused 1 to go into the shop.
Much later she went to accused 1’s business with Warrant Officer Horne. They were told to attend because it was a complaint of theft. They usually didn’t attend the scene when it involved common theft but they followed orders. She felt uncomfortable because accused 1 was speaking to them about their boss, Arno, ie accused 4 who he felt he needed to call in their presence. He purported to discuss a lunch arrangement and golf with accused 4. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 836
She wrote out her own statement and signed it but not before a commissioner of oaths. She doesn’t know how it came to be commissioned.

Brigadier Anand Pillay
He was cluster commander of Milnerton cluster in February 2013. On Saturday 15 February 2013 while he was at movies with his son, his phone rang and he could see it was the provincial commissioner who is now accused 4, that called him. When he tried to answer the call outside, it had stopped ringing. He assumed that if accused 4 called him, it had to be urgent. Immediately thereafter he received a call from accused 1 who he didn’t know at the time. accused 1 told him that he received the witness’ number from accused 4. He said that his brother’s flat in Century City had been burgled and he wasn’t satisfied with the service he was receiving from Milnerton police. He also said that accused 6 was with him and he was the station commander of Cape Town Police Station and if Milnerton was not prepared to do the investigation, Cape Town would do it. The witness responded that it’s a Milnerton case and he would contact the duty officer, Colonel Sutherland. He then called Sutherland and asked her to go attend the crime scene. The witness also sent accused 4 a text message informing him that he had sent Sutherland out to the scene. After the movie at approximately 22h00, the witness called accused 1 to find out if he was satisfied and he said that Sutherland was there and he was satisfied. accused 1 wanted to meet the witness and buy him a salomie but the witness declined the offer as he sensed that accused 1 wanted to become familiar with him.
A few days later accused 1 called the witness again and said that he wasn’t satisfied with the attention that the case was receiving. accused 1 said that he went to Century City and obtained the security camera footage. accused 1 said that computers with important work on were stolen from his brother’s flat and the computers were required urgently. He said that on the footage one can see a white golf with a black fender leaving and on the back seat he could see a flat screen tv. Later that vehicle was found in Gugulethu. Accused 1 said that there were three Brigadiers sitting with him and the witness could hear voices in the background. The witness heard the female voice of accused 7 say: “Tell him if he doesn’t have anyone to do it, I can do it.” He recognised her voice because she was station commander of Tableview at the time and they spoke regularly. The witness said that it’s a Milnerton case and they are capable of investigating it. The witness then called the station commander at Milnerton, Brigadier Stander and gave him the information that accused 1 had given the witness.
Stander went to the flat but found no video footage. Later accused 1 called the witness again and said that the white Golf was seen in Kenilworth or Mowbray and accused 1 needed the computers urgently. The witness called Stander again and said that he should give feedback directly to accused 1.
On 21 February 2013, accused 1 called the witness and said that he wasn’t satisfied with the investigation and would like to meet the witness.
At 14h00 on 21 February 2013, accused 1, with his son Zameer and his brother Shabir Dawjee, arrived at the witness’ office for a meeting. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 837
The witness had the group commander of detectives, a cluster detective who was a relative of accused 4 and the investigating officer all present at the meeting.
The officers gave accused 1 feedback and said that the case was receiving priority and they were doing their utmost to resolve the investigation. The witness told accused 1 that it’s a Milnerton case and he doesn’t appreciate other Brigadiers from other police stations offering to do the investigation. Accused 1 responded by saying that the witness should not speak like that about accused 4 who had the right to become involved because they were friends and accused 1 would die for accused 4. The witness said that he wasn’t referring to accused 4 but to other Brigadiers.
Accused 1 said that he was going to call the Provincial Commissioner, ie accused 4 and he began dialling. The witness said the meeting was concluded and everyone left his office. accused 1 spoke loudly in the passage on his phone and said: “General, this person is very arrogant and I’m not getting any assistance.” He allowed accused 1 back into his office at the request of the latter’s son. accused 1 explained that he had known accused 4 for a very long time and that he had done a lot for the police. He funded or sponsored many projects and awards. Then accused 1 asked the witness what type of car he drives. The witness said that he drove a Mercedes Benz. accused 1 said that he could get a BMW for the witness because he has shares in a SMG BMW dealership. Accused 1 said that he got a BMW X5 for accused 4, a BMW 1 series for General Jaftha who was deputy Provincial Commissioner, a BMW X 3 for Brigadier Petersen and Colonel Mathews and a BMW 5 series for accused 6. accused 1 then asked the witness if he applied for the cluster commander position at George because a Major-General’s position was advertised there. The witness deliberately told accused 1 that he didn’t apply while in fact he did. Accused 1 said that the witness is lying because accused 6 also applied for that position and he saw the shortlist and the witness wasn’t on the shortlist. The witness wanted to know why accused 1 needed the stolen computers so urgently and accused 1 said that he set his brother up in a business that supplies the SAPS with ink cartridges and he needed the invoices on the computer. The witness said he wasn’t interested in accused 1’s offer of a vehicle. After accused 1 left, the witness spoke to Lt Col Lamoer and asked him to tell accused 4 that accused 1 was using his name and it could compromise his position.
A few months later the witness attended a meeting at the Provincial Command centre where he met accused 6. He jokingly told accused 6 how could accused 1 want to buy him a salomie. That evening the witness received a call from accused 1 who said that he had been informed that the witness accused him of trying to bribe him with a salomie. The witness replied that he merely joked about it.
On 19 September 2013 he was again at the Provincial Command centre. The witness asked accused 6 how his friend, Dawjee was. accused 6 said that the witness had formed the wrong impression of accused 1 who did a lot for the police. Accused 6 also said that on that day it was accused 1’s birthday. accused 6 called accused 1 and said that the witness wanted to speak to him. The witness declined and said he would speak to him some  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 838
  other time. While driving home that day, the witness felt bad because accused 6 said accused 1 was a good person and it was his birthday, so the witness called accused 1 to wish him happy birthday. accused 1 said he had a good birthday, there were Brigadiers at his celebration and accused 4 flew down from Pretoria for his birthday. accused 1 said that Indians shouldn’t fight one another. The witness invited accused 1 for coffee on condition that the witness pays.
There was an event planned by the provincial commissioner in Atlantis and the witness attended. In the presence of Generals Vearey and Jacobs, accused 4 addressed the witness sternly and angrily and he wanted to know why police member’s private cars were parking on the police station’s grounds and why the grass was cut shortly before he arrived. The witness thought that those were issues to address with the station commander. He tried to explain but he didn’t want to become argumentative with the provincial commissioner, ie accused 4.
The witness was cross-examined by accused 1’s Counsel concerning his role and responsibility as cluster commander. It was put to him that if a complainant such as accused 1’s brother wasn’t satisfied with the attention the case was receiving, he could complain to him. The witness agreed but said that there was a chain of command to follow. The complaint should first be made to the station commander but the complainant bypassed the chain of command and as a result he asked Colonel Sutherland to attend the scene herself. In his view, the case did receive priority because Sutherland, the investigating officer and the station commander were involved in the first few days after the burglary. Usually burglaries do not receive that level of attention. Fingerprints were found and a suspect was arrested within a month of the burglary. The witness believes that despite the priority given, accused 1 expected greater priority.
The witness said that he ensured that the case received priority because he understood that the provincial commissioner had wanted him to give it his attention.
He was questioned about how it is untoward for other Brigadiers to have offered to assist with the investigation when Milnerton SAPS wasn’t able to act quickly. The witness said that there were no grounds upon which to conclude that Milnerton SAPS were unable to properly investigate.
The witness said that accused 1 expected that the stolen computer had to be found soon after the burglary and he was being unrealistic because stolen goods like that are rarely recovered.
When the witness met Asaram some time later, and she mentioned the problems she was having with Mr Dawjee, the witness remembered the problems he had encountered with Dawjee.
Thereafter Brigadier Hansraj who works at Crime Intelligence spoke to the witness about his encounters with accused 1 and told the witness that the investigating officer, Colonel Enus would contact him. Colonel Enus did contact him and he made a statement in this case.
He drafted his statement with reference to the itemised billing of his own cellular phone so that he could have the dates of contact between him and accused 1 correct. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 839
He knew that accused 1’s telephones were being monitored but he didn’t know who the other suspects were and if their phones were monitored.

Evaluation
Since Mrs Dawjee, Zameer Dawjee and Colonel Izaks didn’t testify, I do not rely on what they allegedly informed Brigadier T Hansraj and what Zameer Dawjee allegedly told Brigadier Pillay. Their names are however included in the summary of testimony purely for the purpose of identifying who were present and in the case of Brigadier Hansraj, to explain how she came to attend at accused 1’s business premises looking for Nadeem Noor.
The evidence led by the State sketch a milieu in which accused 1 appeared to have more knowledge about the internal working of the SAPS than most civilians and sought to utilise that knowledge and his friendship/relationship with the remaining accused to obtain preferential treatment and in some instances, a more effective and speedier resolution of his complaints, than the average person.
The evidence, which is supported by the pleas of guilty on the corruption counts, also demonstrates the existence of gratifications given to accused 4, 5 and 6.
The relevant accused’s subsequent plea of guilty and section 220 admissions are as follows:
In respect of accused 1 to 3:

Pleas of Guilty in terms of section 112(2) and Admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA

“I change my plea from not guilty to guilty and those of accused 2 and 3 on the following counts in terms of section 112(2) and make the following admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA:

Count 3:

I met Arno Lamoer (accused 4), 25 years ago whilst working in Manenberg as a petrol attendant. He was a constable at Manenberg Police Station. Over the years we have remained firm friends as have our wives until Arno Lamoer’s wife passed away. We holidayed and socialized together. His children and mine grew up together and my and his children treated our separate homes as their own whilst growing up.
During the period 2011 to 2013 Arno Lamoer ran into financial difficulties. I, through the services of and with the assistance of accused 2 and 3, helped him financially. He was then a Lieutenant-General in the SA Police. I gave R20 000 to his daughter on her marriage in 2011, to him R7 000 in February 2012, R15 000 in December 2012, R2 000 in January 2013 and R10 000 in August 2013. In April 2012 I gave him R3 180 towards his holiday accommodation on the Garden Route and in July 2013 R10 149,50 towards him hiring a vehicle. I gave Arno Lamoer and his family in total over the period from December 2011 to August 2013 R67 329,50. When Arno Lamoer received his pension he repaid this amount in full.
I accordingly admit that on 8 occasions during the period 3 December 2011 and 19 August 2013, and at or near the districts of Goodwood, Cape Town, and/or Bellville. I gave accused 4, a public officer and his family, monies totalling R67 329,50. My main intent was to help a very close friend. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 840
I admit however that at the time of the payments I foresaw as a possibility, and reconciled myself with that fact, that such payment could cause accused 4 to give me preferential treatment when carrying out or exercising his powers, duties or functions as a police officer should I ever in the future approach him for assistance concerning police matters, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA. My actions in making the aforesaid payments were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.
Accused 4 did in fact directly assist or favour me in one instance in November 2013 by giving me a letter setting out my good standing with the SAPS.

Count 4:

I met Darius van der Ross through my sponsorship of various police activities in the Northern Suburbs. He was a Brigadier in the SA Police. I and accused 2 and 3 sponsored for example a Thula Thula room at Bellville Police Station for victims of crime, police fundraising events, numerous sporting events and sponsored prizes or awards that recognized outstanding police work. As the evidence has shown I was a businessman that the police could rely on when they were in need of donations for police work.
Darius van der Ross and I became house friends over the years as we shared numerous interests, mostly policing.
Over a period from 30 April 2012 to 15 July 2013 I allowed Darius van der Ross to use the businesses’ petrol account on 5 instances where he bought petrol amounting to R3 324,60. Towbars Cape CC in April 2012 also sponsored his costs associated with a police golf event in an amount of R4 000. That sponsorship was declared and made known to the SA Police.
I accordingly admit that on these 6 occasions during the period 30 April 2012 and 15 July 2013, and at or near the districts of Goodwood, Cape Town, and/or Bellville, I and accused 2 and 3 wrongfully and unlawfully gave accused 5 gifts totalling R7 324.60. Our main intent was to help a very close friend of mine.
I admit however that at the time of the payments I foresaw as a possibility, and reconciled myself with that fact, that such payments could cause accused 5 to give us preferential treatment when carrying out or exercising his powers, duties or functions as a police officer should I ever in the future approach him for assistance concerning police matters, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA. Our actions in making the aforesaid payments were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.
I have read and confirm what is said by accused 5 in his section 112 plea in paragraphs 9.1, 9.2 and 9.3 and confirm and admit that accused 5 did give me the assistance he described therein.

Count 5:

Colin Govender and I are cousins. I have known him most of my life. After he, his wife, Sharon, and children moved to Cape Town our families became very close. Whenever either my wife and I or they go away, for example, then the parents staying in Cape Town look after all the children.
We go on holidays together and are the closest of house friends. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 841
Over the period November 2011 to October 2013 I and accused 2 and 3 gifted Colin R24 601,44 made up as follows:
I paid for the family’s pool maintenance (R5 770);
For vehicle rental (R14 554,97);
Petrol expenses (R726,47); and
Two flight tickets (R3 543).
I accordingly admit that during the period November 2011 to October 2013, on at or near Goodwood, I and accused 2 and 3 gave accused 6, a public officer R24 601,44 as described above and on the dates there mentioned for his, and/or for the benefit of his family. Our main intent was to help a very close friend of mine and his family.
I admit however that at the time of the payments I foresaw as a possibility, and reconciled myself with that fact, that such payment could cause accused 6 to give me and accused 2 and 3 preferential treatment when carrying out or exercising his powers, duties or functions as a police officer should we ever in the future approach him for assistance concerning police matters, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA. Our actions in making the aforesaid payments were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.
I have read and confirm what is said by accused 6 in his section 112 plea in paragraph 9.1 to and including 9.8 and confirm and admit that accused 6 did give us the assistance he describes therein.

Count 12:

Iro accused 1

In February 2013 I offered to assist Brigadier Pillay, should he ever wish to obtain a BMW motor vehicle, by getting him preferential treatment at a BMW franchise in exchange for him assisting me and my brother in getting the police to do their duty expeditiously in investigating a break in at my brother’s flat and in recovering the stolen property. Such offered assistance involved me going to talk to a friend of mine at SMG Motors (who sold BMW vehicles) to ask that preferential treatment be accorded to Brigadier Pillay should he want to purchase a BMW.
I admit accordingly that at the time I offered to assist should he want to purchase a BMW I foresaw as a possibility and reconciled myself to that fact that such offer could cause Brigadier Pillay to assist in getting police officers under his control to do their duty expeditiously and thereby granting me preferential treatment, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA and is wrongful and unlawful.
My actions in offering to assist Brigadier Pillay regarding the BMW were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.

Count 13:

Iro accused 1

On a date in October 2013 I spoke to a Police Colonel Hiranwanlal about a VW Polo belonging to me that was in a police pound in Durban. I wanted my vehicle back. The Colonel had been told by Brigadier Colin Govender before speaking to me that the return of the vehicle to me was above board. The Colonel nevertheless refused to assist in the return of my vehicle. I impressed on him that I was a friend of the police and had sponsored numerous police events and intended to do the same in future. The Colonel swore at me, ending our conversation. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 842
I admit accordingly that when I told Colonel Hiranwanlal that I was a friend of the police and had sponsored numerous police events and intended to do the same in future I foresaw as a possibility and reconciled myself to that fact that such a statement could cause Colonel Hiranwanlal to assist me in getting my vehicle released from the pound, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA.
My actions in offering future sponsorships to SAPS to Colonel Hiranwanwal were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.

Count 14:

Iro accused 1

On 14 October 2013 I gave General Matakata R1 000 in cash. General Matakata was known to my wife. When General Matakata visited me I gave her the money as my wife had asked me to give her a gift of chocolates. My intention was to buy her those chocolates but had never gotten around to doing so. At the time that I gave her the money I told General Matakata that the money was from my wife.
I admit however that at the time of the payments I foresaw as a possibility, and reconciled myself with that fact, that such payment could cause General Matakata to give me preferential treatment when carrying out or exercising her powers, duties or functions as a police officer, either in connection with my complaints to her at our meeting about the investigation in the present case, or should I ever in the future approach her for assistance concerning police matters, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA. My actions in making the aforesaid payments were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.

Count 15:

Iro accused 1

Lieutenant General Thulani Ntobela, a police officer stationed in Mpumulanga, had asked Colin Govender about obtaining tickets to attend a jazz festival in Cape Town in late 2013. Colin Govender asked me if I had spare tickets to the festival. I did have spare tickets. I phoned General Ntobela whom I had met through Colin and said he could have the spare tickets in exchange for transport when and if I went to Mpumulanga. I sent him the spare tickets.
I admit however that at the time of giving of the tickets I foresaw as a possibility, and reconciled myself with that fact, that such payment could cause General Ntombela to give me preferential treatment when carrying out or exercising his powers, duties or functions as a police officer should I ever in the future approach him for assistance concerning police matters, conduct that is proscribed by section 4(1)(b)(i) to (iv) of PRECCA. My actions in making the aforesaid payments were accordingly wrongful and unlawful.

Count 16:

Iro accused 1; 2 and 3

I was the sole member of Towbars Cape CC (accused 2), Towbars King CC (accused 3) and Shine the Way 307 CC. All three CC’s fit towbars. On 9 October 2013 I was approached by Warrant Officer Pieterse to quote on supplying and fitting a towbar to a police vehicle. He requested me to supply three quotes.
I in turn requested my employees in the three CC’s to supply quotes on supplying and fitting a towbar. They did. I failed to disclose that I  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 843
  was the sole member of the three CC’s to Pieterse or the SAPS. The names of the three managers of the three CC’s appeared on the quotes.
The work was never carried out. Unbeknown to me Pieterse had been sent to trap me into giving him the three quotes he requested.
I accordingly admit that on the abovementioned date and place and at or near Goodwood, in the district of Goodwood I wrongfully, unlawfully and intentionally defrauded Pieterse and/or the SA Police Service, by failing to disclose to Pieterse or SAPS that I was the sole member of the entities that quoted for the work to be done and accordingly were not independent quotations. The quoted prices however were not inflated and did represent market related prices for the work to be carried out.

Count 25:

Defeating or Obstructing the Course of Justice

Iro accused 1

I admit that on or about 2 May 2012 and at or near Goodwood, in the District of Goodwood, I wrongfully, unlawfully and with the intention to defeat or obstruct the course of justice, caused a letter to be drafted in the name of an employee in the employ of accused 2, namely Lindy-Lou Loock stating that she was not aware of any funds paid to accused 4.
When I caused the letter to be drafted and placed into the personal files of Lindy-Lou Loock I knew that such letter did not reflect the truth as I knew she was aware of me paying amounts that set out in items 1 – 4 of schedule 1 to the indictment to accused 4 as such financial transactions were done with her knowledge as bookkeeper.
Such letter was compiled because I was at loggerheads with Colonel Asaram and possibly would need the letter to counter her allegations that my relationship with accused 4 was somehow corrupt. I admit that I thereby attempted to defeat or obstruct the course of justice having such a letter drafted and placed in Ms Loock’s personal file.

  I never used the letter in any way and the letter at all relevant times remained in the personal file of Mrs Loock.

Count 26:

Fraud

Iro accused 1


During the course of 2011 I was approached by Andre Petersen, a relative by way of his marriage to a family member, Zaida Karriem, and who was previously employed by me as a manager at Towbars King, for assistance in purchasing a vehicle for him as he did not qualify for bank finance.
He contacted me and asked me to buy the car in my name and to finance the car in my name and that he would pay me the installments I had to pay to Alphera Financial Services to pay for the car. The underlying agreement between myself and Mr Petersen was that when the last installment was paid I would transfer ownership of the vehicle to him. The installments that Mr Petersen would pay me amounted to R3 000, which installment included insurance on the vehicle.
Mr Petersen resided in Durban with Zaida Karriem. Mr Petersen took the Polo during May 2011 to Durban.
During the early part of 2012, Mr Petersen stopped making payments to me. I contacted him and demanded the return of the vehicle as he  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 844
  was no longer making the payments as agreed. I also withdrew my permission for him to use the Polo. I also informed Zaida Karriem of the withdrawal of my permission for Petersen to use the vehicle and that he should return the Polo.
I continued to pay the installments due to Alphera Financial Services as set out in the installment sale agreement.
By August 2013, Mr Petersen had still not returned the Polo to me. I approached accused 5 for assistance and requested that the matter be investigated so that the Polo can be returned. On or about 15 August 2013 I signed an affidavit drawn up by Warrant Officer McGregor that set out the above facts. The affidavit is attached hereto marked ‘MSD1’. A docket was opened on the charge of ‘use of vehicle without owner’s consent.’
I was later informed by the investigating officer that he had taken the docket to the Regional Prosecutor who had then converted the charge to theft.
After some investigation by the SAPS, the vehicle was eventually traced and recovered in Durban in the possession of Mr Petersen. The vehicle was eventually returned to me after I had withdrawn the charge of theft against Mr Petersen.
I admit that I failed to comply with certain sub-clauses of the instalment sale agreement with Alphera Financial Services as set out on page 59 of the indictment being:
The Polo was to be kept in my possession or under my control at all times;
If the Polo became lost or stolen I was obliged to immediately inform Alphera in writing thereof;
I was obliged to inform Alphera in writing of any change concerning;

  the address of the premises in which the Polo was ordinarily kept;

  the name and address of any other person to whom possession of the Polo had been transferred.

I did not and had no intention of keeping the vehicle in my possession or under my control when I signed the agreement. I did not inform Alphera in writing of the address where the Polo was ordinarily kept nor did I in writing tell them of the transfer of possession to Mr Petersen.
I however did honor my payment obligations to Alphera Financial Services, and paid all amounts owing to them even though Petersen stopped paying me. This company has never complained of any wrong doing on my part. I have fully paid for the car.
I accordingly admit that on or about 27 May 2011 and at or near Goodwood, in the district of Goodwood, I wrongfully, unlawfully and with the intent to defraud, falsely and to the potential prejudice of Alphera Financial Services, failed to inform them of the underlying agreement I had with Petersen and that Petersen was to take possession of and use the vehicle and store the vehicle away from me.

Count 27:

Defeating or Obstructing the Course of Justice

Iro accused 1

During the early part of 2012, Mr Petersen stopped making payments to me. I contacted him and demanded the return of the vehicle as he was no longer making the payments as agreed. I also withdrew my permission for him to use the Polo. I also informed Zaida Karriem of the withdrawal of my permission for Petersen to use the vehicle and that he should return the Polo.
I continued to pay the instalments due to Alphera Financial Services as set out in the instalment sale agreement as also the insurance amounts.
By August 2013, Mr Petersen had still not returned the polo to me. I approached accused 5 for assistance and advice and told him what is set out above. I made use of him firstly because I was not able to read and write fluently and secondly because he was far better equipped to explain my predicament. He in turn relayed the information to Warrant Officer Bronwyn McGregor a police officer who then drew up my statement for me. I signed it. The facts contained in such affidavit are all true and correct. The affidavit is attached here to marked “MSD1”. A docket was opened on the charge of ‘use of vehicle without owners consent’.
I was later informed by the investigating officer that he had taken the docket to the Regional Prosecutor who had then converted the charge to theft. I had no input and played no role in such a decision.
After some investigation by the SAPS, the vehicle was eventually traced and recovered in Durban in the possession of Mr Petersen. The vehicle was eventually returned to me after I had withdrawn the charge of theft against Mr Petersen.
I failed to accurately describe the true circumstances of the alleged offence of driving a motor vehicle without the owner’s consent in that my statement says:

  “The suspect however fail (sic) to return the vehicle. He disappeared with the vehicle is (sic) now allegedly somewhere in the Durban area.”

  The affidavit (‘MSD1’) did not reveal the following details:

I intended to transfer ownership of the vehicle to Petersen when the vehicle was paid for;
Petersen took possession of the vehicle for his personal use in Durban with my consent prior to me rescinding my consent;
The affidavit was misleading in that it failed to indicate that Petersen was allegedly using the vehicle without my consent in Durban and not the Western Cape, meaning that any crime was committed in Durban, to be investigated by Durban SAPS and not the Western Cape and its SAPS members. A Durban investigation would have deprived me of being able to call upon the assistance of accused 5.
Accordingly, I plead guilty to Defeating or Obstructing the Course of Justice.”
In respect of accused 4:

  Plea of guilty in terms of section 112(2) and admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA:

I changed my plea from not guilty to guilty on the following count in terms of section 112(2) and makes the following admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA: 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 846
  Count 7:

  Corruption in contravention of section 4(1)(a) read with sections 1, 2, 4(2), 21, 24, 25 and 26 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 12 of 2004 – Corrupt activities relating to public officers (Accepting or agreeing or offering to accept a gratification)

  I admit that:

  During the period December 2011 to September 2013, on the dates mentioned in Column 2 of Schedule 1 and at or near the places mentioned in Column 4 of Schedule 1, in the districts of Goodwood and/or The Cape, I, being a public officer as described in the Preamble, wrongfully and unlawfully agreed to accept and/or accepted from accused 1 to 3 the gratifications (in the form of loans) described in the Preamble and mentioned in Schedule 1, for my benefit and/or for the benefit of any other person, in order to act personally or by influencing another person so to act, in a manner prescribed in section 4(1)(i) to (iv) of PRECCAA (as described in the Preamble).

I further wish to state that no favours were done for acc 1 to 3 up and until 17 November 2013 (sworn affidavit of investigating officer dated 30 September 2013 refers).
I accordingly admit that I wrongfully, unlawfully and intentionally gave a letter of good standing to accused no 1 for the benefit of accused 1 to 3 in a manner as prescribed in section 4(1)(i) to (iv) of PRECCAA (as prescribed in the Preamble). I admit that my intention to commit the crime was dolus eventualis as when I gave the aforesaid letter of good standing I foresaw as a possibility that such letter would play a role in what is prescribe in the Preamble.”
In respect of accused 5:

  Pleas of guilty in terms of section 112(2) and admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA

I change my plea from not guilty to guilty on the following counts in terms of section 112(2) and make the following admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA:

  Count 8:

  Corruption – in contravention of section 4(1)(b) read with sections 1, 2, 4(2), 21, 25 and 26 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 12 of 2004 (‘PRECCAA’) – Corrupt activities relating to public officers (offering or giving a gratification).

Over a period from 11 May 2013 up to and including 15 July 2013 I, with the permission of accused 1, used the petrol account of accused 2 and/or accused 3 on 5 instances to the value of R3 324,60. I filled my personal vehicle with petrol to the value mentioned above. accused 1 also sponsored me for a police golf event in the amount of R4 000 in April 2012. That sponsorship was declared and made known to the SA Police in the prescribed manner.
I accordingly admit that on 5 occasions during the period 11 May 2013 up to and including 15 July 2013, at or near the places mentioned at numbers 2 to 6 in Column 4 of Schedule 2, in the districts of Goodwood and/or The Cape, I, being a public officer as described in the Preamble, wrongfully, unlawfully and with dolus eventualis agreed to accept and/or accepted from accused 1 to 3 the gratifications mentioned above and described in the Preamble (excluding the R4000 golf sponsorship) for my benefit. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 847
I admit that my intention to commit this crime was dolus eventualis as when I accepted the aforesaid gratifications I foresaw the possibility that such gratifications would induce me in the execution of my duties to act, personally or by influencing another so to act in a manner that amounts to improper preferential treatment of accused 1, 2 or 3. Despite forseeing this possibility, I still accepted the gratifications.
Accordingly I admit the following interventions by me, which amounted to improper preferential treatment in favour of accused 1:
In and during August 2013, accused 1 called me from Parow Arms. He indicated that he needed certain documents to be certified. He said he needed me to assist him. I immediately contacted Lt. Williams and told him to go to Parow Arms to assist accused 1, which he did.
In and during August 2013 I assisted accused 1 in opening a case for use of a motor vehicle without the owner’s consent. accused 1 informed me that the vehicle was in Durban. I personally took his statement and gave instructions to my officers to expedite the investigation. I gave this matter my personal attention and improperly prioritised its investigation.
During the period from May 2013 onwards, accused 1 approached me for police assistance and/or to complain about police service delivery. When he did so, I would give him improper preferential treatment personally or by directing others to do so.”
In respect of accused 6:

  Pleas of guilty on terms of section 112(2)

I plea guilty to the following counts in terms of section 112(2) and make the following admissions in terms of section 220 of the CPA:

  Count 9: Corruption – in contravention of section 4(1)(a) read with sections 1, 2, 4(2), 21, 24, 25 and 26 of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 12 of 2004 – Corrupt activities relating to public officers (Accepting gratifications).

  During the period November 2011 to October 2013, on the dates mentioned in Column 2 of Schedule 3 and at or near the places mentioned in Column 4 of Schedule 3, in the district of Goodwood, accused 6, being a public officer as described in the Preamble, wrongfully, unlawfully and with dolus eventualis accepted from accused 1 to 3 the gratifications described in the Preamble and mentioned in Column 3 of Schedule 3 (excluding item 14 of Column 3 of Schedule 3) for the benefit of accused 6:

  Mohamed Saleem Dawjee (accused 1) and I are cousins. I have known him most of my life. Our families are supporting each other when the need arises from time to time with loans and business arrangements. We go on holidays together and are the closest of house friends. Over the period November 2011 to October 2013 I received the following gratifications in the amount of R 24 601,44 from accused 1, 2 and 3:

Payment of pool maintenance (R5 770);
For vehicle rental (R14 554,97);
Petrol expenses (R726,47);
Two flight tickets (R3 543).
I admit that my intention to commit this crime was dolus eventualis as when I accepted the aforesaid gratifications I foresaw the possibility that  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 848
  such gratifications would induce me in the execution of my duties to act, personally or by influencing another so to act in a manner that amounts to improper preferential treatment of accused 1, 2 or 3. Despite forseeing this possibility, I still accepted the gratifications.
Accordingly, and with the above mentioned personal acts and influences by me, I admit to the following interventions referred to in Schedule 6 of the indictment:
During February 2013 I was willing to go to an address in Gugulethu after hours to check on a vehicle which was used in a burglary of at the house of accused 1’s brother in the event that the Cluster Commander of Milnerton, Brigadier Pillay, had not have anybody available to do so. (Item 17).
During February 2013 I introduced W/O Knoetzen to accused 1 in my office to assist accused 1’s daughter with an appeal in respect of her fire-arm license application. (Item 25).
Lieutenant General Ntombela, a police officer stationed in Mpumulanga, asked me about obtaining tickets to attend a jazz festival in Cape Town in late 2013. I asked accused 1 if he had spare tickets. accused 1 then contacted General Ntombela and gave his spare tickets to General Ntombela directly. (Item 12).
During July 2013 I introduced Captain Hendricks to accused 1 to assist him with an application to temporarily possess a fire-arm in terms of a regulation 86(4) form. (Item 26).
During July 2013 I requested Constable de Jager to hand over a Norinco pistol to accused 1 in terms of the regulation 86(4) form. (Item 32 and 34).
During July 2013 I arranged an appointment for Mr Ross with the designated police officer, Captain Hendriks, to assist Ross with the application for a fire-arm license. Ross accordingly attended at the Cape Town Police Station and Hendricks assisted him with the motivation of the application. (Item 36).
During August 2013 accused 1 enquired from me to make printouts of his and his wife’s fire-arm registrations to see whether he would qualify for another firearm. I then asked W/O Knoetzen to make the printouts. (Item 43).
During October 2013 I called detective commander at the SAPS Phoenix to assist accused 1 with the clearance and handover of the Polo vehicle which was recovered (and not stolen) as per the docket. (Item 64 and 65).”
In respect of accused 7:

  In her plea of not guilty to count 10, accused 7 provides the following explanation:

Ms Govender denies that she received, accepted, agreed or offered to accept any gratification from accused 1, 2 or 3 either for the benefit of herself or for the benefit of another person.
Ms Govender denies that any gratification was accepted by her in order to act in a manner that amounts to illegal, dishonest, unauthorised exercise, carrying out or performance of any powers, duties or functions arising out of her legal obligations as a public officer and more specifically that she received gratifications corruptly in furtherance of the private, personal or business interests of accused 1 to 3. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 849
Ms Govender denies that she accepted or received any gratification that amounts to the abuse of her position of authority, a breach of trust or in violation of her legal duties as a public officer or to influence her to use her office or position to advance the interests of accused 1 to 3.
Ms Govender denies that she received any gratification in order to act in a manner designed to achieve an unjustified result.
Ms Govender denies that she attempted, conspired, aided, abetted, induced, incited, instigated, instructed, commanded or counselled any other person to commit an offence as listed in the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act.
Ms Govender engaged with accused 1, a family member, in his personal capacity in legitimate and lawful contractual transactions as set out below.
Ms Govender did not enter into any unlawful or illegal transactions with accused 1, 2 or 3.
Ms Govender had no mens rea to engage in any illegal or unlawful transactions with accused 1, 2 or 3.
Ms Govender denies that she received gratifications from accused 1 to 3 in furtherance of an ongoing scheme with a common purpose.
Ms Govender denies that she:
offered or displayed any favours in work-related activities to accused 1, 2 or 3; or
influenced another police employee to do or not to do any favours for accused 1, 2 or 3; or
engaged in any transaction or action with accused 1 – 3 that was in conflict with or infringed on the execution of her official duties; or
acceded to any demands by accused 1 or that she was required by accused 1 to use her official position and influence at all.
The items listed in Schedule 4 were justified transactions pursuant to mutually accepted contractual obligations between adult and authorised parties to wit accused 1 and 6 and Ms Govender.
Item 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 refer to pool maintenance at the residence of Ms and Mr Govender (accused 6) which was paid from the account of accused 2 in a total amount of R5 777.
The pool maintenance service was rendered by a company (Pool People) in terms of a contract between accused 1 and the Pool People which maintenance was provided to five different properties (including the pool of Ms Govender and her husband – accused 6) paid for by accused 2. The underlying agreement between accused 1 and accused 6 was that accused 6 will reimburse accused 1 on a monthly basis.
Accused 1 was reimbursed on a monthly basis for all the above payments.
Ms Govender denies that the pool maintenance was a gratification or a gift or a registerable interest as contemplated in the Financial Disclosure Framework applicable to senior public officers.
The pool maintenance contract made legitimate business sense.

Cash Deposits:

Items 5; 7; 8 and 10 refer to cash deposits into the Nedbank account of Ms Govender from the account of accused 1 in the total amount of R21 000.
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 850

These amounts were instalments for the sale of a Toyota Tazz from accused 6 to accused 1 in the amount of R30 000 during January 2013.

Ms Govender denies that any cheques drawn on the bank accounts of accused 1, 2 or 3 was paid into her bank account.

BMW 320i:

Item 9 refers to a BMW 320i with a contract value of R490 919, which vehicle was registered on 2 January 2013 in the name of Ms Govender. accused 1 executed a suretyship and acted as co-debtor pertaining to the financing of the BMW 320i. accused 1 also authorised BMW Financial Services to debit his account in respect of obligations arising from the finance agreement.
The explanation of Ms Govender is that accused 6 wanted to buy the BMW 320i during November 2012. The requirement of BMW Financial Services in their standardised application forms was to submit details of a co-debtor and that of a surety. accused 1 forms part of the SMG Fleet Portfolio and has access to a facility allocated to him by BMW South Africa. accused 1 introduced various members of police senior management to SMG and all those transactions were also facilitated by accused 1. accused 1 acted on that basis as co-debtor and surety for the BMW 320i and in that capacity signed an authority for BMW Financial Services to use his account as co-debtor and to act as surety for Ms Govender.
The BMW 320i was registered in the name of Ms Govender but was exclusively used and driven by accused 6.
The first four payments were debited against accused 1’s account in the amount of R7,983.38 on the first day of January, February, March and April 2013 which payments were reimbursed to accused 1 from the Nedbank account of Ms Govender.
The sale agreement between BMW Financial Services and Ms Govender with accused 1 as co-debtor and/or surety was a lawful agreement and not a concealed or undisclosed transaction.

BMW 520D:

A BMW 520D with a contract value of R669 001,65 was registered in the name of Ms Govender on 22 March 2013.
The explanation by Ms Govender is that accused 6 who used the BMW 320i traded it is on a second-hand BMW 520D. Similar requirements by BMW Financial Services applied regarding a co-debtor and a surety. accused 1 again facilitated the transaction and acted as co-debtor and executed a suretyship.
The instalments which were debited against accused 1’s account by BMW Financial Services in monthly amounts of R10 951,53 were in close proximity reimbursed from Ms Govender’s Nedbank account to accused 1’s FNB account.
Ms Govender paid the rest of the instalments from April 2014 directly into the bank account of BMW Financial Services and still to date pays the instalments although the vehicle has been used from April 2013 to date by accused 6.
Ms Govender therefore denies that Items 9 and 11 are correct inasmuch that it states that an amount of R490 919 was debited to her account on 2 January 2013 and that an amount of R669 001,66 was debited to her account on 2 April 2013.
The BMW 320i and the BMW 520D sale agreements between Ms Govender, BMW Financial Services and the suretyships by accused  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 851
  1 for both vehicles made legitimate business sense between family members.

Petrol:

. . . 
The explanation of Ms Govender is that the petrol payments in respect of Items 13, 14 and 15, were for the BMW 520D driven and used exclusively by accused 6 and the petrol slips were signed for by accused 6. The petrol payments in Item 16, 19 and 20 were for the Renault Clio which was driven and used exclusively by Kirshia Govender and the petrol slips were signed for by Kirshia.
Ms Govender therefore denies that the petrol items in Schedule 4 were gratifications received or accepted or agreed to be accepted by her. She never purchased petrol on accused 2’s petrol account.
Ms Govender further denies that she directly or indirectly accepted the petrol payments for the benefit of accused 6 or Kirshia as she had no knowledge of the transactions or that she ought to have known about the existence of such transactions. accused 6 used the BMW 520D for work purposes and Kirshia used the Renault Clio exclusively for transport while she was a student.

Vehicle Rent Paid:

Item 12 refers to the rental of a Nissan by P Govender at the value of R955,50 and paid for by accused 2.
Ms Govender denies that she received, accepted or agreed to accept a gratification relating to the rental of a Nissan by P Govender for the account of accused 2.
Ms Govender denies any knowledge of the rental or that she ought to have known about it.
Ms Govender denies that any cars were rented by her for the account of accused 1, 2 or 3.

Mango Flights:

Item 18 of Schedule 4 refers to a payment made by accused 2 for a Mango return flight ticket in the amount of R2 218.
Ms Govender denies that she was a passenger on those particular flights and/or that the flights were booked for her and/or that a flight ticket was purchased for her by either accused 1, 2 or 3 at any stage. It appears from the transaction details that the flights were booked for Kirshia Govender by accused 1 and paid for from his credit card account.
Ms Govender denies that she received, accepted or agreed to accept the flight tickets as a gratification for the benefit of Kirshia Govender.

Renault Clio:

Item 17 refers to the sale of a Renault Clio with registration number KIRSH WP in the amount of R167 400,20. accused 1 is reflected as the person responsible for the purchase of this car as his identity number is reflected in Item 17. Ms Govender was advised that accused 1 applied to Alphera Finances for the financing of the purchase.
Accused 1 facilitated the purchase of the Renault Clio with the assistance of Alphera Finances and the Renault was registered in the name of accused 1. Kirshia used the car. Ms Govender paid instalments from a Nedbank account into the FNB account of accused 1.

On 3 February 2014 accused 6 paid the outstanding balance of R163,217.38 to Alphera Finance.

 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 852
Ms Govender denies that the purchase of the Renault Clio was received, accepted or agreed to be accepted as a gratification by her for the benefit of Kirshia.
Paragraph 119 in the indictment refers to assistance by Ms Govender to accused 1 to gain possession of a Volkswagen Polo motorcar in Durban from Petersen and that she intervened placing SAPS resources at the disposal of accused 1. This is false and consequently denied.

C. Counts 28 – 109:

Explanation:

Ms Govender denies that she knew or ought reasonably to have known that any property or part thereof or any service, advantage, benefit or reward was allegedly derived, received or retained in connection with or as a result of any alleged unlawful activity carried on by either accused 1, 2 or 3.
Ms Govender denies any knowledge of unlawful activities carried on by accused 1, 2 or 3 and/or whether any proceeds of such allegedly unlawful activities were property used in any agreement, arrangement or transaction listed in Schedule 4.
Ms Govender denies that she performed any act with such property to the effect that or to have the effect of concealing, disguising the nature, source, location, disposition or movement of the said property for the following reasons:
She did not know or ought to have known that the source of the property used to pay for the pool maintenance, the petrol, the renting of cars, the flight tickets and the cash deposits into her bank account were alleged proceeds of criminal activities.
She did not conceal or disguise or disposed the movement of the said property - it was clearly reflected in bank statements, petrol slips the rental agreement and on the flight booking and was not received, issued to or signed by Ms Govender.
The BMW 320i and BMW 520D purchases were transparent and well documented transactions, the source of which was BMW Financial Services.
The transactions in Schedule 4 were not declared in terms of the Financial Disclosure Framework simply because it was not registrable interests or gifts.
The transactions were not material advantages that were not available to the general public.
Ms Govender denies that she acted unlawfully or with mens rea regarding the alleged unlawful activities of accused 1, 2 or 3 and/or regarding the proceeds of any such alleged unlawful activities.
Ms Govender admits that on or about 4 October 2013, that accused 4 (the “Provincial Commissioner”) called her about a complaint of accused 1 and instructed her to enquire about the complaint. Ms Govender admits that she instructed one Colonel Anthony to attend to the complaint as a result of accused 4’s call to her.”
In view of the State failing to adduce evidence to disprove accused 7’s plea explanation that:
The BMW motor vehicles were acquired for accused 6 and that the petrol utilised in those vehicles were also for accused 6’s benefit,
The pool maintenance payments made by accused 2, was made in terms of an agreement between accused 1 and 6 (which accused 6 accepted in his plea as a gratification),
Airline ticket to the value of R2 218 has been accepted by accused 6 as his gratification,
There are no further alleged gratifications attributed to accused 7 which remain unexplained.
The State did not adduce evidence of accused 7’s interventions on behalf of accused 1, 2 and 3.
Brigadier Hansraj’s s testimony concerning accused 7’s alleged interventions are:
that accused 7 asked her to calm accused 1 down and see him out of the building.
that accused 7 behaved aggressively towards her in a meeting chaired by accused 5 and harassed her for causing an investigation into the accused’s conduct.
Neither of the above allegations constitute proof of the commission of an offence by accused 7 for which she is charged in this case.
Brigadier Pillay alleged that when accused 1 called him to say that the vehicle driven by the suspect during the burglary at his brother’s flat had been seen in Gugulethu, he heard accused 7’s voice in the background and he heard her say that if Milnerton police cannot pursue the vehicle, she can.
Although Pillay was challenged during cross-examination on how he knew it was accused 7 speaking, he provided a plausible answer to the challenge as set out in the summary of his evidence earlier.
Accused 6 confirms his willingness to go to Gugulethu. The allegation that accused 7 also expressed her willingness to do so, is not disproved. The court accepts that accused 7 accordingly offered to assist accused 1.
That offer does not however amount to unduly preferring accused 1 in compensation for gratifications provided because no gratifications to her were proved beyond reasonable doubt.
The corruption charge is the predicate offence for which a conviction is required to succeed in the POCA related charges.

Law applicable to the offence of corrupt activities involving a public officer
PRECCAA is the primary anti-corruption legislation in South Africa. It was enacted to deal more comprehensively with the corrosive scourge of corruption in all its manifestations than previous anti-corruption statutes. It provides a general offence of corruption; creates offences in respect of corrupt activities relating to specific persons; offences in respect of persons in an employment relationship; offences in respect of corrupt activities relating to specific matters and various offences relating to possible conflict of interest and other unacceptable conduct as well as offences of accessory to or after an offence, attempt, conspiracy and inducing another person to commit an offence. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 854
Section 4(1)(a)(i)(aa) which describes offences in respect of corrupt activities relating to public officers contained in Chapter 2, Part 2 of the Act provides as follows:
Any – (a) public officer, who directly or indirectly, accepts or agrees or offers to accept any gratification from any other person, whether for the benefit of himself or herself or for the benefit of another person; or (b) . . . in order to act, personally or by influencing another person so to act, in a manner – (i) that amounts to the – (aa) illegal, dishonest, unauthorised, incomplete, or biased; or (bb) . . . exercise, carrying out or performance of any powers, duties or functions arising out of a constitutional, statutory, contractual or any other legal obligation; . . . is guilty of the offence of corrupt activities relating to public officer.”
The primary motivation for the enactment of PRECCAA is set out in its preamble which, inter alia, reads as follows:

“Whereas the Constitution enshrines the rights of all people in the Republic and affirms the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom;

And Whereas the Constitution places a duty on the State to respect, protect, promote and fulfil all the rights as enshrined in the Bill of Rights;

And Whereas corruption and related corrupt activities undermine the said rights, endanger the stability and security of societies, undermine the institutions and values of democracy and ethical values and morality, jeopardise sustainable development, the rule of law and the credibility of governments, and provide a breeding ground for organised crime;

And Whereas the illicit acquisition of personal wealth can be particularly damaging to democratic institutions, national economies, ethical values and the rule of law;

And Whereas there are links between corrupt activities and other forms of crime, in particular organised crime and economic crime, including money-laundering;

And Whereas corruption is a transnational phenomenon that crosses national borders and affects all societies and economies, and is equally destructive and reprehensible within both the public and private spheres of life, so that regional and international cooperation is essential to prevent and control corruption and related corrupt activities;. . . ”

Section 4(1)(b) deals with misconduct by the corruptor which can take the form of either direct or indirect gratifications. That sub-section goes on to describe the element of intent that must be present. It merely uses the words: “in order to act. . . ”. It doesn’t qualify the intent of the corruptor in seeking an undue intervention from the corruptee. No provision is made in sub-section 4(1)(b) for a direct or indirect intent because it is an integral part of the offence that the corruptor must have intended to provide a gratification with the specific intent of deriving some undue benefit.
Elements of the offence of corrupt activities relating to public officers as contained in sections 4(1) and 4(2) of “PRECCAA” are as follows:
There must have been an offer of or actual gratification given to a public officer.
That gratification must be given for the purpose of moving the public officer to act in a manner that amounts to the unlawful exercise of or the failure to exercise his duty, functions or authority.  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 855

This requirement contemplates an improper act or omission ie unlawfulness.

That act must be designed to achieve an unjustified result ie intention. This aspect is the consequence of improper conduct which leads to an undue result.
In Selebi v S 2012 (1) SA 487 (SCA) [also reported at [2012] 1 All SA 332 (SCA) – Ed] the appeal Court held as follows concerning the elements of the offence of corrupt activities:
The first element (acceptance) is self explanatory and does not require any elucidation. As for the second element (gratification) it is said to include ‘money, whether in cash or otherwise’. The third element (inducement) depends on whether receipt of the gratification is directed at procuring the recipient to act in one or more of the ways as set out in the subsection. I have dealt with ‘unlawfulness’. Just as with ‘unlawfulness’, ‘intention’ referred to in (e) above, is not specifically mentioned in the definition section of the PCCA Act but the definition must be construed as requiring intention. The recipient must have the required intention at the moment he receives the gratification. Snyman says: ‘[I]ntention always includes a certain knowledge, namely knowledge of the nature of the act, the presence of the definitional elements and the unlawfulness. A person has knowledge of a fact not only if she is convinced of its existence, but also if she foresees the possibility of the existence of the fact but is reckless towards it; in other words she does not allow herself to be deterred by the possibility of the existence of such fact. She then has intention in the form of dolus eventualis.’”
The court said the following at paragraph 39 of Selebi’s case concerning the element of intention in section 4(1) of the Act:

“Intention/mens rea

I turn to consider the question whether the State succeeded in proving beyond reasonable doubt that the payments were received from Agliotti and any quid pro quo was afforded with the requisite mens rea. I have already alluded to the fact that section 4(1)(a)(i) of the PCCA Act does not specifically refer to intention but rather uses the words ‘in order to act, personally or by influencing another person so to act . . . ’. According to Burchell these words at least import some ‘intention’ element. Besides, there is a presumption in our law that mens rea is required for a contravention of a statutory provision. In the case of a contravention of section 4 of the PCCA Act the Legislature has made it easier for the State to prove the presence of ‘intention’. Section 24 of the PCCA Act provides that once the prosecution has proved that gratification (payment) was accepted or agreed and the State can show that despite having taken reasonable steps, it was not able with reasonable certainty to link the acceptance of the gratification to a lawful authority or excuse on the part of the person charged, and in the absence of evidence to the contrary which raises reasonable doubt, it is sufficient evidence that the person charged accepted such gratification of that person ‘in order to act’ in a manner envisaged in section 4 of the PCCA Act. The provisions relate to a rebuttable presumption of mens rea, including knowledge of unlawfulness, which is rebuttable by the person charged.”
The minority judgment in Selebi provides direction concerning the interpretation of section 4(1) read with section 4(2) as follows:
Section 4, in my view, does not require an agreement between the corruptor and the corruptee, nor does it require a quid pro quo from the  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 856
  corruptee. It must be plainly understood that the conviction in this case on the evidence that established an agreement and the giving of a quid pro quo, is not the low water mark of the section.
On the view that I take of section 4, the trial court would have been justified to convict the appellant even without a finding that he had provided a quid pro quo. Section 4(1)(a)(ii) reads: ‘Any public officer who . . . accepts . . . any gratification from any other person . . . in order to act, . . . in a manner that amounts to – (aa) the abuse of a position of authority; (bb) a breach of trust; or (cc) the violation of a legal duty or a set of rules; is guilty of the offence of corrupt activities relating to public officers.’
Section 25 of the PCCA Act supports the wide interpretation of section 4. It provides: ‘Whenever an accused person is charged with an offence under Part 1, 2, 3 or 4, or section 20 or 21 (in so far as it relates to the aforementioned offences) of Chapter 2, it is not a valid defence for that accused person to contend that he or she – (a) did not have the power, right or opportunity to perform or not to perform the act in relation to which the gratification was given, accepted or offered; (b) accepted or agreed or offered to accept, or gave or agreed or offered to give the gratification without intending to perform or not to perform the act in relation to which the gratification was given, accepted or offered; or (c) failed to perform or not to perform the act in relation to which the gratification was given, accepted or offered.’”
In casu the civilian accused, namely accused 1, 2 and 3 have all admitted in their plea of guilty that they provided accused 4, 5 and 6 with gratifications.
Accused 4, 5 and 6 were public officers at the time when they received those gratifications. They admitted in their pleas that they received the gratifications from accused 1, 2 or 3.
Accused 1, 2 and 3 further admitted in their plea that they provided the gratifications for the purpose of obtaining assistance or preferential treatment for accused 1 or for persons that accused 1 sought assistance for.
Accused 4, 5 and 6 admitted in their pleas that they provided accused 1 or those for who he sought assistance, with undue interventions.
Accused 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 all admitted that the acts made by accused 4, 5 and 6 had the effect of unjustifiably preferring accused 1 or those persons on whose behalf he sought their intervention.
It has been said that corruption is a crime of double intention. The corruptee/recipient must not only intend to receive the gratification but also do so in order to act in a certain way. There can be no doubt that not only did accused 4 to 6 receive financial benefit from accused 1 to 3, but also intended to and did cause themselves or other police officers to give preferential treatment to accused 1, 2 and 3 and to use police officers to do accused 1’s bidding.
The State adduced no evidence on counts 1 and 2, ie the alleged racketeering in contravention of the POCA and asked for an acquittal on those counts.
Similarly the State led no evidence on counts 28 to 109, ie the alleged money-laundering offences in contravention of the POCA and asked for an acquittal on those counts. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 857
The State was clearly content to proceed with the predicate offences which may have given rise to the POCA offences.
I turn now to deal with the remaining counts on which the accused pleaded not guilty and for which an acquittal is sought.

Count 6
This count relates to the allegation that accused 1 to 3 have committed corrupt activities relating to a public officer, namely, accused 7 by offering or giving her gratifications.
Accused 6 and 7 are married and share a common household and have common children.
The alleged gratifications given to accused 7 are summarised in Warrant Officer Wynand Wessels, the forensic investigator’s relevant testimony above.
Accused 6 admits in his section 112(2) plea that the gratifications allegedly received by accused 7 were in fact destined for him and that he enjoyed the benefit of those gratifications and provided accused 1 to 3 with interventions therefor.
In the absence of a plea of guilty by accused 7, the evidence adduced read with the admissions of accused 4 to 6 do not constitute proof beyond reasonable doubt that accused 1 to 3 committed the offence of corrupt activities in relation to accused 7.

Count 11
This count concerns accused 1 to 3 allegedly offering or giving a gratification valued at R5 000 to Warrant Officer Ainslee for the setting of bail for an accused in a Lansdowne case on 18 April 2011.
No evidence was led and no admissions were made concerning this count. Accused 1 to 3 stand to be acquitted on this count.

Charges other than corruption, for which accused 1 to 3 only pleaded guilty

Count 16
The summary of substantial facts incorporated into the indictment relating to this count are as follows:

“Fraud

(accused 1 to 3)

In that – during or about the period 9 June 2011 to 9 October 2013, on the specific dates mentioned in Column 2 of Schedule 9 and at or near Goodwood, in the district of Goodwood and/or Cape Town, in the district of The Cape, accused 1 to 3 wrongfully, unlawfully and with the intent to defraud, falsely and to the prejudice, either real or potential, of the SA Police Service, and/or SAPS officials mentioned in Column 3 of Schedule 9.

Gave out to the aforesaid SAPS that the quotations to the value of R42 610 submitted by accused 2, accused 3 and Shine the Way 307 CC mentioned in Columns 4, 5 and 6 of Schedule 9 and were fair, competitive, independent, proper and genuine quotations; and/or

 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 858

Failed to reveal to the abovementioned persons and/or entities, when there was a legal duty so to reveal, that the abovementioned quotations were directed by accused 1, and/or accused 1 was the sole member of all three of the bidders, as described in the Preamble.”

Accused 1, 2 and 3 pleaded guilty to this count in the following manner:
I was the sole member of Cape Tow-Bar CC (accused 2), Tow Bar King CC (accused 3) and Shine the Way 307 CC. All three CC’s fit towbars. On 9 October 2013 I was approached by Warrant Officer Pieterse to quote on supplying and fitting a towbar to a police vehicle. He requested me to supply three quotes.
I in turn requested my employees in the three CC’s to supply quotes on supplying and fitting a towbar. They did. I failed to disclose that I was the sole member of the three CC’s to Pieterse or the SAPS. The names of the three managers of the three CC’s appeared on the quotes.
The work was never carried out. Unbeknown to me Pieterse had been sent to trap me into giving him the three quotes he requested.”
The preamble to the indictment contains the following allegations:
The system, for the procurement of goods and services for State institutions is governed by section 217 of the Constitution, Act 108 of 1996. It is required that the relevant [Supply Chain Management (‘SCM’) system must be fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective.
Chapter 4 of the SAPS national supply-chain management instructions (‘SCMIs’) contains instructions requiring price quotations for the acquisition of goods and services for the SAPS. Prospective suppliers must apply to be listed in a register that must be kept. Price quotations must only be invited from suppliers appearing on the list of prospective suppliers.
In terms of Paragraph 4.2.1.10 of the SCMIs, at least 3 price quotations must be obtained for the provision of goods and services above R2000.
The Pocket Guide for the Invitation and Consideration of Price Quotations (‘PGICPQ’), issued by the SAPS SCM Division, contains guidelines relevant to quotations for the supply of goods and services. In terms of Paragraph 9.1.2 of the PGICPQ, at least 3 written quotations must be obtained from suppliers appearing on the list of prospective suppliers for the acquisition of goods and services above the value of R2000 but not exceeding R30 000.
It is implicit in the Constitutionally required fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective SAPS SCM system that the prescribed 3 quotations must properly be quotations from three different suppliers who are independent of each other and who do not each know what the other competing quotations are. Any quotation from a supplier who is not independent of the others or who bears knowledge of or controls any of the competing quotations would fall foul of the requirements.
In some instances, bidders were required to sign a ‘certificate of independent bid determination’, in which the declarant certified that there had been no consultations, communications, agreements or arrangements with any competitor regarding the contents of the respective bids, including the price.
Various SAPS officials are involved in processing the applications for acquisitions based on the required three quotations and approving the highest scoring qualifying quotation, based on the lowest price quoted.  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 859

  Such SAPS officials reasonably rely on the required three quotations as genuine, in the sense that they are truly supplied from three independent suppliers, with no knowledge of the details or price of the other bids, so as to comply with the fairness, equity, transparency, competitiveness and cost-effectiveness that is required.

As indicated in Chapter 1 above, accused 1 was the sole member of accused 2 and 3. accused 2 and 3 were registered on the SAPS list of supplier.
On 5 April 2004, Shine the Way 307 CC (‘STW 307’), registration number 2004/031968/23 was incorporated.
Accused 1 was registered as the sole remaining member of STW 307 on 5 September 2005.
STW 307 traded as Bullbar Towbar Manufacturers (‘BTM’ at Shop 2, Joe Hattingh Street, N1 City, Goodwood. This is the same address as accused 2.
STW 307, STW 307 trading as BTM and/or BTM were not registered on the SAPS list of suppliers.
Information was received that accused 1 engaged in ‘cover quoting’ to provide SAPS applicants for tow-bar fittings with three quotations, including from accused 2 and 3 and BTM. As a result, two operations in terms of section 252A of the Criminal Procedure Act, No 51 of 1977 (‘CPA’), were conducted on 28 February 2013 and 9 October 2013. Both revealed that the three quotations produced to the agents purportedly from accused 2, 3 and STW 307, trading as BTM, were generated from the same premises at the same time, under accused 1’s directions.
The quotation dated 27 March 2013 was, as SAPS required, accompanied by a “Declaration of interest” (‘DOI’) form. The names and identity numbers of the bidders and ‘Full details of directors/trustees/members/shareholders’ were indicated on the DOI forms.
The DOI forms failed to indicate that accused 1 was the sole member of all three bidders.
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
As a result of accused 1 to 3’s misrepresentations and failures to reveal the truth, the SAPS payment to accused 2 in each case was thus not a payment that was fair, equitable, transparent, competitive, and cost-effective.”
Fraud has been described by CR Snyman: Criminal Law (6ed) (2014) at 523 as the unlawful and intentional making of a misrepresentation which causes actual prejudice or which is potentially prejudicial to another.
I have emphasised the elements of the offence above.
The bases on which accused 1, 2 and 3 plead guilty is the failure to disclose:
That accused 1 had the sole financial interest in each of the three Close Corporations whose quotations he provided. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 860
That the quotations were accordingly not those of three independent juristic entities that held themselves out to be willing to do the required work and supply the necessary goods.
The plea contains the exculpatory statement that the prices in the quotations were market related prices.
The patently obvious purpose of requiring three independent quotations, is to ensure that the SAPS is able to select the most cost effective one. The prejudice or potential prejudice to the SAPS lies in it being denied the opportunity to make that selection in circumstances where each juristic entity would not know the other’s best price and where the true market value could be independently tested.
The nature of the intention present in the plea on this count is not one where accused 1, 2 and 3 foresaw that the representation may be false but nonetheless decided to make it.
Accused 1, 2 and 3, through the conduct of accused 1, who held sole ownership of all three close corporations, actually knew that those close corporations were not independent from one another but nonetheless proceeded to hold out that they were. Dolus directus is accordingly applicable to the intention exercised here.

Counts 17–21

Count 17
This count concerns an allegation that accused 1 and 6 traded in a firearm, by selling it or giving possession of it to a person who is not entitled to such possession, when they did not have a firearm dealer’s licence.
Item 37 of Schedule 6 to the indictment summarises the State’s allegations concerning this count as follows:

“On 15 August 2013 accused 1 took the Norinco to Brussels Stockmakers, Parow to have it refurbished. Ross went with accused 1. He was introduced as the intended new owner.

As a non-licence holder and notionally permitted Storer in terms of FCR 86(4), accused 1 was not permitted to remove and transport the Norinco from the place of storage, being the safe at his residential address in Plattekloof.

Accused 1 was unable to produce a licence. He produced instead the FCR 86(4) form.

A few days later, Brussels Stockmakers called Ross to inform him of the costs of repair, which he authorized.

On 21 August 2013, Brussels Stockmakers called Ross to collect the Norinco.

Ross called both accused 1 and 6 to confirm that he could collect the Norinco. Both accused 1 and accused 6 assured Ross that the FCR 86(4) form was sufficient, as long as he stored the Norinco in the prescribed safe that he had installed.

Sometime thereafter, Ross paid the refurbishment bill, collected the Norinco and stored it in his safe.”

No evidence was led concerning this count. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 861

Count 18
This count concerns the same firearm mentioned in count 17, but is a charge of accused 1 allegedly being in unlawful and wrongful possession of the firearm and accused 1 and 6 causing the firearm to be placed in possession of Mr Ross when none of them had a licence to possess that firearm.

Count 19
This count contains the allegation that accused 1 and 6 knew that Mrs Mullins, whose deceased husband owned the firearm, was not the lawful possessor of the firearm, but nonetheless caused the completion of a regulation 86(4) form in which a false impression was created that Mrs Mullins had the lawful authority to grant accused 1 permission to store the firearm on her behalf. This count relates to the same firearm mentioned in counts 17 and 18.

Count 20
This count concerns accused 1 and 6’s alleged failure to report that Mr Ross was in unlawful possession of the firearm referred to in counts 17–19.

Count 21
This count concerns accused 6 allegedly having wrongfully, unlawfully and intentionally caused Hendricks to receive complete and submit a firearm licence application for Mr Ross when Hendricks wasn’t the designated firearms officer for Durbanville or Goodwood.
No evidence was led in support of the allegations contained in counts 17 to 21.
It is patently clear that the allegation that accused 1 and 6 caused Mr Ross to have possession of the relevant firearm encompasses implicit allegations that formed the basis of counts 18 to 20.
In my view, counts 18 to 20 amount to a duplication of charges.
Accused 6’s section 220 admission in paragraph 9.6 reads as follows:
During July 2013 I arranged an appointment for Mr Ross with the designated police officer, Captain Hendriks, to assist Ross with the application for a fire-arm license. Ross accordingly attended at the Cape Town Police Station and Hendricks assisted him with the motivation of the application. (Item 36.)”
The above-stated does no more than admit that accused 6 procured an appointment for Mr Ross with Captain Hendricks.
Accused 6’s admission does not go far enough in that it does not include a statement that accused 6, in arranging the appointment between Mr Ross and Captain Hendricks, knew that Captain Hendricks would receive, complete and submit Ross’ application to possess a firearm. Accused 6’s admission does not constitute sufficient proof that he knew exactly what role Captain Hendricks would play in rendering assistance to Mr Ross, as envisaged by count 21.
Accused 1 and 6 therefore stand to be acquitted on counts 17 to 20 and accused 6 ought to be acquitted on count 21. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 862

Count 22
This count concerns accused 1 allegedly purchasing ammunition without having a licence to possess the ammunition. Accused 1 allegedly used SAPS printouts from their database showing that accused 1 and his wife were licence holders.
Accused 6 admitted that he provided accused 1 with said printouts.
Paragraph 9.7 of accused 6’s admissions reads as follows:
During August 2013 accused 1 enquired from me to make printouts of his and his wife’s fire-arm registrations to see whether he would qualify for another firearm. I then asked W/O Knoetzen to make the printouts. (Item 43).”
Accused 6 was not charged with count 22. Accused 1’s intention to use the printouts and his wife’s firearm licence for the unlawful possession of ammunition and his alleged possession were not proved as no evidence was led on this count.

Count 23
This count concerns accused 1 allegedly using his wife’s firearm licence to obtain possession of the ammunition mentioned in count 22.
No evidence was led of facts in support of this count and no admissions were made concerning this count either.
Accused 1 accordingly stand to be acquitted on this count.

Count 24
Concerns accused 1 allegedly purchasing ammunition for a different calibre firearm than that mentioned in count 23. No evidence was led and no admissions were made concerning this allegation.
Accused 1 accordingly stands to be acquitted on this count.

Count 25
The basis upon which the State alleged in the indictment that accused 1 had defeated or obstructed the course of justice is set out in the preamble to the indictment as follows:

“Defeating or Obstructing the Course of Justice

Accused 1 became aware that there was a DPCI investigation concerning his allegedly corrupt relationship with accused 4, including giving gratifications to accused 4. On or about 2 May 2012, accused 1 caused affidavits to be drafted and signed by employees in the employ of accused 2, namely Annelise Theron, Lindy-Lou Loock and Togieda Moosa. Each affidavit was to the following effect:

  accused 1 and accused 4 had been acquainted for over twenty years;

  Each of the deponents was not aware of any funds paid to accused 4;

  Each of the deponents was aware of donations to the SAPS;

  In the case of Lindy-Lou Loock, no financial transactions were done without her knowledge as bookkeeper.

Accused 1 said that he wanted the affidavits to ‘counter Col Asaram’. accused 1 was well aware that he had by then given accused 4 the gratifications mentioned in items 1 to 4 of Schedule 1, in the case of item 1 using the bank account of accused 3 and in the case of item 3, using the  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 863
  bank account of accused 2. accused 1 was well aware that the affidavits did not reflect the truth. They were designed to mislead the DPCI investigation then current and conceal the gratifications that he, and/or accused 2 and/or accused 3 had given to accused 4.”
Accused 1 admitted in his plea that he wrongfully, unlawfully with the intention to defeat or obstruct the course of justice, caused a letter to be drafted in the name of an employee of accused 2, in which she stated that she was not aware of any funds paid to accused 4. Accused 1 further admitted that he knew that the employee knew that he had made certain payments for accused 4 because the employee was the bookkeeper. Accused 1 also admitted that he acquired the letter for the purpose of countering allegations that his relationship with accused 4 was somehow corrupt.
Snyman at 327 describes the offence of defeating or obstructing the course of justice as unlawfully and intentionally engaging in conduct which defeats or obstructs the course of or administration of justice.
The words emphasised above constitute the elements of the offence.
The offence often encompasses other offences and those could include, inter alia, fraud, forgery or perjury.
On accused 1’s admission, the letter contains false information. That information is undoubtedly a misrepresentation. On accused 1’s admission, the letter was designed to counter allegations of corruption. The potential prejudice lies in the administration of justice being impeded by that misrepresentation.
When viewed in conjunction with accused 1’s plea of guilty on count 3, there can be no doubt that accused 1 knew that the representation contained in the letter was false. His intention to conceal the true position in the letter amounts to him subjectively knowing that the representation is false and nonetheless proceeding to cause the letter to be drafted and kept under his control with the intention of hampering an investigation into alleged corruption. The intent present here is dolus directus.

Count 26
This count concerns accused 1 failing to disclose certain material facts to Alphera Financial Services, a company that entered into a credit agreement with accused 1 for the purchase of a motor vehicle which was to be paid by accused 1 in instalments.
The following material provisions of the agreement set out in the summary of substantial facts to the indictment are as follows:
accused 1 intended at all times not to comply with all the following standard clauses in the ISA with Alphera that stipulated the following:
Ownership of the Polo remained with Alphera until all amounts due in terms of the ISA were paid;
accused 1 was obliged to keep the Polo in his possession or under his control at all times;
accused 1 may not have sold the Polo, nor have ceded, assigned or delegated any of his obligations in terms of the ISA, nor let or parted with possession of the Polo;
accused 1 may not have parted with possession of the Polo; 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 864
 9.1 If the Polo became lost, accused 1 was obliged immediately to inform Alphera in writing;
If the Polo was kept on any premises not owned by accused 1, he was obliged immediately to notify Alphera of the name and address of the owner of the premises;
accused 1 was obliged to inform Alphera in writing of any change concerning:

 26.1.2 the address of the premises in which the Polo was ordinarily kept;

 26.1.3 the name and address of any other person to whom possession of the Polo had been transferred.”

The indictment contains the following allegations concerning this count:
The abovementioned clauses are designed to provide the financier who retains ownership of the vehicle under an ISA with adequate security against the risk of loss, given the inherent risk attaching to the purchaser not possessing the vehicle for the duration of the Isa.
Accused 1 misled Alphera, to its prejudice or potential prejudice, by pretending that the ISA was genuine and by failing to reveal that, in fact, the ISA was simulated to provide credit to Petersen, who was blacklisted, and that accused 1 intended to ignore all the abovementioned provisions in the ISA when he concluded the ISA.”
Accused 1’s plea contains the following relevant admissions:
I admit that I failed to comply with certain sub-clauses of the instalment sale agreement with Alphera Financial Services as set out on page 59 of the indictment being:
The Polo was to be kept in my possession or under my control at all times;
If the Polo became lost or stolen I was obliged to immediately inform Alphera in writing thereof;
I was obliged to inform Alphera in writing of any change concerning;

  the address of the premises in which the Polo was ordinarily kept;

  the name and address of any other person to whom possession of the Polo had been transferred.

I did not and had no intention of keeping the vehicle in my possession or under my control when I signed the agreement. I did not inform Alphera in writing of the address where the Polo was ordinarily kept nor did I in writing tell them of the transfer of possession to Mr Petersen.
. . . 
I accordingly admit that on or about 27 May 2011 and at or near Goodwood, in the district of Goodwood, I wrongfully, unlawfully and with the intent to defraud, falsely and to the potential prejudice of Alphera Financial Services, failed to inform them of the underlying agreement I had with Petersen and that Petersen was to take possession of and use the vehicle and store the vehicle away from me.”
Accused 1 says in his plea that the vehicle was recovered, returned to him and he paid Alphera Financial Services in full.
The facts admitted by accused 1, for which no evidence has been led, prove potential prejudice. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 865
Accused 1 knew the true position concerning the facts that he omitted at the time when he transacted with Alphera. His intention was to advance the interest of Petersen to the potential prejudice of Alphera. The intent here is dolus directus.

Count 27
This count refers to item 51 of Schedule 6 to the indictment which reads as follows:

“Accused 1 and accused 5 failed in the affidavit accurately to describe the true circumstances of the alleged offence of driving a motor vehicle without the owner’s consent. In particular, the affidavit did not reveal the following details:

The ISA with Alphera was a simulated transaction in terms of which Petersen, and not accused 1, was the actual purchaser;
Petersen would immediately take possession of the Polo and keep and use it in Durban, obviously with accused 1’s consent, inasmuch as this was necessary;
If accused 1 validly withdrew his consent for Petersen to use the Polo after Petersen failed to honour the agreement to continue the monthly payments, Petersen was using the Polo without his consent in Durban.

In all the circumstances, accused 1’s affidavit was calculated to mislead and cause the false impression that the failure to pay amounted to the offences of use without the owner’s consent and/or theft. If so, the affidavit falsely created the impression that such offences had occurred, or at least commenced, in the SAPS Bellville Cluster area.

The misleading affidavit was calculated wrongly to vest SAPS and accused 5 with the criminal jurisdiction to investigate what was essentially a civil dispute for breach of contract that had occurred in Durban.

Ultimately, the misleading affidavit was calculated to facilitate accused 5’s improper intervention to assist accused 1 to recover the Polo.”

On a reading of the above paragraph and the affidavit of accused 1 annexed to his section 112(2) plea, it is clear that accused 1 did indeed fail to disclose the following:
That he intended to transfer ownership of the vehicle to Petersen when the vehicle was paid for;
That Petersen took possession of the vehicle for his personal use in Durban with his consent prior to him rescinding his consent.
The intent of accused 1 was that of actual knowledge that the omissions would serve to cause SAPS Durban to investigate a criminal case.
No evidence was adduced concerning the statement at the trial.
There is no evidence that accused 5 knew that the omissions of accused 1 as stated above existed at the time when he commissioned the affidavit.
Accused 5 accordingly stand to be acquitted on count 27.
Accused 1 pleads guilty to this count and was convicted on that plea. accused 1 with full knowledge of the correct facts, concealed them and in so doing acted with direct intent, ie dolus directus.
The evidence led in this trial reached the stage where it only made out a case for accused 1 to 6 to meet concerning corrupt activities and the influence peddling that accompanied that offence. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 866
In the absence of sufficient evidence concerning the counts for which the accused pleaded not guilty, this Court finds that the State has not discharged its onus of proof beyond reasonable doubt and the accused stand to be acquitted on those charges.

  It is ordered that:


Allie J (Sentence):
The factors that Courts are enjoined to take into consideration when imposing sentence are set out in S v Zinn1 as “. . . the crime, the offender and the interests of society.”
In considering an appropriate sentence, the court must strive to attain the primary objectives of sentence which is, inter alia, that of deterrence, rehabilitation, where possible and retribution.2
Courts are further enjoined to temper their judicial discretion when sentencing, with an element of mercy. In S v Rabie3 it was said that mercy: 

“. . .has nothing in common with maudlin sympathy for the accused. While recognizing that fair punishment may sometimes have to be robust, mercy is a balanced and humane quality of thought which tempers one’s approach when considering the basic factors of letting the punishment fit the criminal as well as the crime and being fair to society.”

 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 868
In determining sentence, the court has to take account of the accused’s personal circumstances, the nature and circumstances of the offences and the consequences of the commission of the offences.
The court has to weigh up those circumstances and consequences to arrive at a sentence which fits the offences and the accused. That balancing exercise invariably lead to sentence being individualised for each accused.

The personal circumstances of accused 1
The accused was born on 19 September 1965.
The accused didn’t complete his formal education but left school when he was in grade 3. He received on the job training at each new employment. He used the skills he acquired in employment to build his businesses.
A year after his birth, his parents divorced and the accused remained in the care of his mother. Both his parents remarried but because of the separation, he lost contact with his biological father. The accused only rekindled his relationship with his biological father as an adult. After his father’s death he took care of his stepmother who still lives with him.
The accused remained close to his biological mother and his half siblings born from his mother’s new marriage. His sisters informed the probation officer that he has always been protective over his family and that they all are still very close. However, the accused and his stepfather were not very close. The accused informed the Probation Officer that he always felt like an outsider in his own home and that this motivated him to make a success of his life.
The accused has been married for 34 years, has three children from the marriage and an older son from a previous relationship who lives with him.
The accused believes that the case contributed to the breakdown of the marriages of two of his children.
The accused lives in a home built in an affluent area on two erven.
At the commencement of the case, the accused was the owner of two successful tow-bar businesses. Due to the nature of his charges and high legal costs, ownership of the juristic entities in which those businesses operated was transferred to his son, Zameer Dawjee. The accused is now a paid employee of his son. He is a consultant in the business.
The Probation Officer reports that the accused and his family are not destitute and all their daily basic needs are met.
He was plagued with pain from an ulcer during the trial. He suffers from diabetes, kidney and bowel illness and anxiety.
As a successful businessman, the accused was known to be kind and generous. This is evident from donations and assistance to community churches, mosques, schools and community members alike.
In the evidence adduced in court which was subject to cross-examination by the defence, he is described as a man that threatened, humiliated and placed undue demands on police officers some of who held a lower rank to those of his co-accused. He went so far as to bully some police officers  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 869
  into submission. To achieve that end, accused 1 often referred to his close relationship with his now co-accused and to the personal favours he performed for them. He went so far as to pertinently allege that he had the power to have police officers transferred. He also made reference to issues that ought not to be within the knowledge of a civilian but were in fact internal police matters, thereby demonstrating an intimate knowledge of the hierarchy and accountability structures of the police force and how it operates.
The probation officer reports that he does not view his relationship with his co-accused as wrong nor does he view his interactions with them as something that threatens the integrity of the police force.
The probation officer describes the consequences of the offences of which the accused is convicted as follows:

“Though his actions did not threaten the community or society directly it did make them more vulnerable. A favour for a favour system is seldom a challenge for an affluent individual. If such a system, hypothetically speaking, did exist in an institution like the police service, it would leave the most vulnerable, the poor, without any means to access the police services as they would not be in a position to adhere to ‘a favour for a favour’ system due to their financial standings. Furthermore this might force them to resort to illegal dealings that they would have to use to receive services from the police. . . The offences committed is of a serious nature and could have had far reaching effects beyond that which were described in this case. When deciding on an appropriate sentence it should be taken into account that the crime undermines the integrity and Ethical Code the Police Service is built on. It open the police service up to other criminal activities and to the bidding of other criminals and as such the community to more serious crime.”

The probation officer explains why she believes that the accused doesn’t show true remorse thus:

“His failure to see how his actions has compromised the integrity of the police service makes it difficult for him to feel or show remorse. The accused only sees the negative effect his actions has had on him and his family and his co-accused. He deems the resistance of officials to abide by his will as a direct attack on him as a person and not as them working within the confines of the law.”

The probation officer explains why she believes that the accused poses a low risk of recividism as follows: 

“The accused enjoys the love and support of not just his family but also that of community members that has come to his aid in his time of need. The accused do not wish to expose his family to further trauma nor does he wish to lose all standing in his community. This shows that behavioural change is possible and that the risk of recidivism is low. In order to prevent further harm to his family and in order to restore his footing in the community he will have to abide by the laws of this country. The love and respect of his family and the community is very important to the accused and this will be a great motivator to abstain from reoffending.”

The probation officer recommends a sentence as contemplated in section 276(1)(i) of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of 1977 as a suitable sentence. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 870
The accused was assessed by Ms Sentile for his suitability as a candidate for correctional supervision and found to be a suitable candidate. She reports that the accused was physically abused by his step-father as a child and he quickly learned that in order to avoid beatings, he had to give his step-father money. This is allegedly how he perceived he should earn the love of people. She also reported that he indicated that he had an agreement with his son when he gave the business to him that his son will be responsible for his living expenses and his debts.
Ms Sentile further reports that:

“The accused turned the business into a highly profitable business, employing approximately 30 people. However, when the case started against him media reports claimed that the accused was a druglord so the business took a severe knock. The various banking institutions closed the business banking accounts along with his personal accounts. Lines of credit which were vital for the business were also withdrawn.”

Ms Sentile reports that the accused’s daughter and her children rely on him for care and financial support. She is not working and completing her matric. His youngest son and his wife live with the accused. They too rely on the accused for care and financial support because they are not working. When the case started it was all over the media and no one wanted to be associated with him and his family. The accused informed Ms Sentile that if he received a community-based sentence, he would be able to perform community service. He also indicated that he is willing to comply with all the conditions of that sentence.
Dr Czech, a psychiatrist who had a 2 hour consultation with the accused testified as follows:
Accused 1 had difficulty understanding why it is wrong to lend money to people in need who re-paid the loan and who are friends or relatives;
Accused 1 had previously assisted community members, police officers, churches, mosques and schools and he saw no wrong in assisting his co-accused;
Accused 1 said that he experienced huge problems as a result of being prosecuted in this case such as: his bank accounts being closed and therefore financing was no longer possible;
Consequently, he couldn’t trade effectively and he was forced to sell off properties, cars, movables and surrender policies and he became poor overnight;
The stress of standing trial and the negative publicity associated with it caused him to become extremely anxious;
He lost his appetite, his diabetes became uncontrolled and he had insomnia, which are all symptoms of major depression;
Accused 1 has been receiving psychotherapy for approximately 10 years to deal with his childhood trauma.
Dr Czech reported that accused 1 suffers from the following illnesses but he couldn’t provide dates as to when the diagnosis was made nor could he say when treatment commenced. accused 1 allegedly suffers from insulin  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 871
  dependant diabetes; hypercholestrolaemia; chronic reflux oesophagitis and peptic ulcer disease.
He allegedly had surgery for cancer of his kidney, a “twisted bowel,” an umbilical hernia and his back.
Dr Czech subsequently saw the report of Prof De Kock who treated accused 1 and he discovered that it was suspected cancer but it transpired that in fact it was a narrowing of the ureter.
According to Dr Czech accused 1 enjoyed the position of someone who had risen to success and had influence among very important people and his self-esteem would have been considerably enhanced by that.
The doctor reported that accused 1’s set of values include generosity, and to an extent patronage which are regarded by him as appropriate and not at all criminal. The notion of a minor favour being offered in return by a functionary as illegal was not high in his thought processes at the time.
The doctor expressed the view that despite accused 1’s personality traits including elements of philanthropy, self-interest and patronage, he was not likely to re-offend because he is terrified by being prosecuted and the prospect of punishment.
Dr Czech failed to take account of the consequences of all the charges on which accused 1 was convicted and in particular he didn’t consider the fact that accused 1 not only gave gratifications to his co-accused who he knew well but also offered and gave gratifications to other people who he hardly knew or didn’t know at all.
Dr Czech didn’t balance against accused 1’s ostensible trait of having difficulty refusing requests for assistance, the fact that in some instances, accused 1 initiated the gratifications or offer thereof.
Dr Czech explained accused 1’s propensity to overstate facts for example, when he said that he sold all his properties and that he had a serious illness, as hyperbole.
Clearly accused 1 knew that the doctor would prepare a report for the court and he couldn’t have intend to overstate the facts but not expect it to be taken literally.
During cross-examination Dr Czech conceded that accused 1 has the ability to recover remarkably from trauma and stress as evinced by the fact that despite his childhood, he was able to become a successful businessman.
Dr Czech’s evidence concerning the extent to which accused 1 has genuine remorse, whether he accepts the impact of corruption as being devastating on person’s other than himself and the likelihood of him re-offending is unhelpful, vague and fraught with unexplained inconsistencies.
Dr Czech’s explanation for accused 1 having committed the offences with reference to accused 1’s value system as well as those of the sector of society that the accused associates with, ie that he’s self-esteem is enhanced by having influence over important people, is patronising. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 872

The personal circumstances of accused 4
He is a 57 year old widower with 2 adult daughters aged 25 and 26 as well as a step-daughter aged 33.
He assumed responsibility for the care of his daughters after their mother passed away.
His biological daughters both suffer from depression as a result of the case. One daughter temporarily discontinued her studies and the other became unemployed.
His family described him to the probation officer as a strong, dedicated person who always took the community’s interest seriously. He was also a role model to others.
He achieved a distinguished career in the police service despite having had a poverty-stricken childhood and his father having passed away when he was 10 years old.
His former colleagues expressed to the probation officer his devotion to his career and the interests of the community.
The accused is involved in church activities.
He has no previous convictions.
Apart from taking medication for high blood pressure and kidney stones, the accused is healthy.
His contract was not renewed after he was investigated in this case and he retired from SAPS in November 2015. He receives an income from his pension fund.
He completed Grade 12. He also completed a National Diploma in Policing.
The probation officer describes his employment history as follows:

“Subsequent to the Secondary School education of the accused he commenced casual employment with his mother in a Grabouw apple factory in an attempt to support his younger siblings. The accused was a Grade 6 Mathematics Teacher at Worcester Junior School for a period of 1 year and also did casual employment as a waiter in a local hotel.

During the period of completing the Diploma in Policing at the Bishop Lavis Training College the accused was promoted to the rank of Warrant Officer at the Bishop Lavis Training College and was appointed as a Trainer and Instructor. In 1985 he was further promoted to Lieutenant at Atlantis SAPS. In 1986 the accused was appointed as Station Commander at Atlantis SAPS for a period of 4 years. In the year of 1991 the accused was promoted to the rank of Captain at Manenberg SAPS. He was further promoted in 1993 to the rank of Major and transferred to the District Head Office in Athlone and also as Acting Commander at Langa SAPS. During this period the accused became the Commander of the Anti-Riot Unit. In 1994 he was transferred to Wynberg SAPS where he was the Superintendent for Visible Policing.

He was transferred to Cape Town Cluster Office and in 1995 he commenced his responsibility as Superintendent for Visible Policing in the Cape Town Cluster. During this period he was seconded by the Minister of Police ‘at the time’ to deal with operations pertaining to Corruption in the Western Cape. Upon the PAGAD uprising the accused was further seconded to the NPA in 1996 when the Scorpions was established. He held the rank of Brigadier and in the same year he was appointed as Deputy Area Commissioner of the East 

 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 873

Metropol. In the year 2000 the accused was appointed to take over the operation for the busses and taxi killings. He was further instructed to deal with the operations of Gang Violence and in 2001 he was appointed as Area Commissioner in the Bellville Cluster Unit. Between 2002 and 2010 the accused was the Divisional Commissioner for Operational Response Services. He was later appointed as the Provincial Commissioner in the Western Cape at the rank of Lieutenant General at the Green Point Provincial Office.”

The probation officer explains why she believes that the accused doesn’t take full responsibility for the offence as follows:

“The accused continues to assert that the transactions between him and accused number l, herein referred to as Mr Dawjee were licit. In light of this aspect it can therefore be assumed that the accused disputes full responsibility for the index offence. . . According to the accused he did not participate in any corrupt activities. As stated to the Probation Officer the accused has been friends with Mr Dawjee for over 25 years as they also grew together. The accused indicated to the Probation Officer that when he commenced his employment at Manenberg SAPS their friendship continued. The accused denies extending any favours to Mr Dawjee in his capacity as a member of the South African Police Service. According to the accused he underwent some financial challenges and as a friend Mr Dawjee extended his help. The accused however paid the entire sum of money back to Mr Dawjee which he had borrowed from Mr Dawjee.”

The probation officer recommends correctional supervision as a suitable sentence option.
He was assessed as being a suitable candidate for correctional supervision.

The personal circumstances of accused 5
The accused was born on 6 September 1969 and is now 48 years old. He is a first offender.
He is now in his 4th marriage but he and his wife are currently separated because of the strain that the case caused on their relationship although his wife provides moral support for him.
He has children aged 26, 21 and 18 years respectively. His youngest is a daughter who intends to study at a tertiary institution.
The accused was reared in a poor but stable family environment.
The accused completed grade 12 and later he completed a Diploma in Public Administration.
His family was proud of him as he was the first one to pursue a career.
The accused was promoted in the SAPS within a short period because he was passionate about his work.
He was described by a former colleague as an excellent and proud police officer.
He fulfilled the function of role model and mentor within his extended family.
The accused was dependant on his pension fund after he resigned from SAPS but those funds have decreased. He has casual employment as a driver for a waste management company.
The accused informed the probation officer that he lent an amount of R3324,60 from accused 1 which he didn’t declare but which he paid  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 874
  back and he received a golf sponsorship from accused 1 which he declared.
The accused explained to the probation officer that he could foresee how the loans he received from accused 1 could lead to him granting accused 1 preferential treatment over other people.
The probation officer concludes that the accused is remorseful for having committed the offence. However she believes that he doesn’t fully accept responsibility for the offence nor does he perceive the gravity of it. The probation officer expressed herself thus:

“Even though the accused admits the current offence he still maintains that the money he received from accused no 1 was a loan between him and a person he perceived as his best friend. It is thus not clear to what extent the accused accepts responsibility for the offence. The accused stated that he is genuinely sorry for his involvement in the index offence. It is a concern that Mr Van Der Ross does not understand the gravity of the offence as it was committed by him whilst in public office.”

The accused does attend church.
The probation officer recommends correctional supervision and the accused was also assessed as being a suitable candidate.

The personal circumstances of accused 6
He is 57 years old and his date of birth is 2 February 1961.
He is married for 37 years and has two adult children aged 32 and 30 respectively, who are financially independent.
The case had had a negative impact on the accused’s children’s reputation. A further result of the case is that the accused’s finances have been depleted. His reputation as an upstanding police leader has also been detrimentally affected.
He has an 80 year old mother living in Durban who he visits from time to time.
After completing grade 12 he later completed a Diploma in Police Administration.
He was employed in the SAPS for 37 years having been promoted often. At the time of his arrest he held the position of Provincial Head Inspectorate Compliance.
The probation officer reports that his colleagues, friends, and family members, all described him as a person who has good values, work ethics, integrity and maintains a professional standard.
During his employment he played a pivotal role in the skills development of youth as part of crime prevention.
The probation officer reports on the accused’s remorse as follows:

“He regrets his actions and is taking full responsibility for the offence. He claims that at the time of the offence he was not aware that he is committing corruption. He says that he had cooperated with the investigation and that he is relieved the matter will be concluded.”

The probation officer said that she used the word regret and not remorse because she believed that the words have the same meaning. She  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 875
  explained that in Xhosa there is only one word used to describe both English words.
The accused is a first offender.
The accused is physically healthy and does not have any disabilities. In 1997 he was involved in a serious motor vehicle accident where he sustained severe injuries. He was hospitalised and kept in ICU for 39 days. His jaw was fractured, his knee and ankle were broken. His femur was broken and as a result his right leg is 1 cm shorter.
The probation officer said that the accused wanted to be able to visit his mother in Durban and didn’t want his movement restricted hence he wasn’t keen on correctional supervision as a sentence and she agreed with him, hence her recommendation.
The probation officer recommends a sentence of a fine coupled with a suspended sentence.
The assessment officer found this accused to be a suitable candidate for correctional supervision.

Nature and circumstances of the offences

Accused 1

Count 3: Corruption
Accused 1 was convicted of having given accused 4 gratifications to the value of R67 329,50 during the period November 2011 to August 2013 in circumstances where accused 1 foresaw the possibility that those gratifications could cause accused 4 to give him preferential treatment when carrying out his duties or functions should accused 1 approach accused 4 for assistance.

Count 4: Corruption
Accused 1, 2 and 3 were convicted of having given accused 5 gratifications to the value of R3324,60 during the period April 2012 to July 2013 in circumstances where he foresaw the possibility that those gratifications could cause accused 5 to give accused 1, 2 and 3 preferential treatment in carrying out his duties/functions should they approach accused 5 for assistance with policing matters.

Count 5: Corruption
Accused 1, 2 and 3 were convicted of having given accused 6 gratifications to the value of R24 601,44 during the period November 2011 to October 2013 in circumstances where accused 1, 2 and 3 foresaw as a possibility that those gratifications could cause accused 6 to give accused 1, 2 and 3 preferential treatment when carrying out his duties or functions should accused 1, 2 and 3 ever approach accused 6 for assistance with policing matters.

Count 12: Corruption
Accused 1 was convicted of having offered Brigadier A Pillay preferential treatment at a BMW franchise in exchange for Brigadier Pillay procuring a speedy and successful investigation of accused 1’s brother’s home burglary and theft of goods, in circumstances where accused 1 foresaw the  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 876
  possibility that his offer would cause Brigadier Pillay to ensure that accused 1’s brother receives preferential treatment from members of the SAPS in the course of the investigation of the home burglary and theft.

Count 13: Corruption
Accused 1 was convicted of having offered Colonel Hiranwanlal future sponsorships to SAPS in exchange for assistance in having accused 1’s VW Polo vehicle released from the police’s vehicle pound in Durban expeditiously, in circumstances where accused 1 foresaw the possibility that his offer would cause Colonel Hiranwanlal to accord accused 1 preferential treatment.

Count 14: Corruption
Accused 1 was convicted of having given General Matakata R1000 in circumstances where he foresaw the possibility that the payment could cause General Matakata to give him preferential treatment when exercising her duties/functions inter alia, in the investigation of this case.

Count 15: Corruption
Accused 1 was convicted of having given General Ntombela who was in Mpumalanga, tickets to the Cape Town Jazz Festival in 2013 in circumstances where accused 1 informed General Ntombela that he would have to provide accused 1 with transport should he be in Mpumalanga and accused 1 expected General Ntombela to give him preferential treatment should he require his assistance in policing matters.

Count 16: Fraud
Accused 1, 2 and 3 were convicted of fraud in the form of cover quoting in that accused 1 provided a police officer with quotations in the name of accused 2, 3 and Shine the Way 307 CC for the supply and fit of tow bars to a police vehicle in circumstances where he failed to disclose that he was the sole member of all three close corporations whose quotes he provided and thereby created the impression that the quotations were generated in an arms-length manner.
Accused 1, 2 and 3 were convicted on the grounds that the potential prejudice to the SAPS is that accused 1 held out that they were three independent juristic entities’ quotations and in so doing, the SAPS were denied the opportunity to make the selection in circumstances where each entity would not know what the other’s quotation was and consequently the SAPS would not have been able to test independently the true market value of the work to be performed. accused 1, 2 and 3 were convicted on the basis of dolus directus.
Accused 4’s letter of good standing that he wrote for accused 1 and which is attached to his plea of guilty, contains a paragraph stating that accused 1 does business with the SAPS through proper procurement processes.
Although accused 1 to 3 have not been convicted on grounds of not having followed proper procurement processes, the acknowledged exceptionally close and loyal friendship between accused 4 who was the Provincial Commissioner and accused 1 who did business with the SAPS lends itself to a situation where accused 1 felt comfortable enough to perpetrate the fraud in the form of cover quoting. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 877
Neither the SAPS nor any other state entity ought to be doing business with people who engage in fraudulent business transactions in the course of procuring the award of a contract from a state entity. The consequences of the fraud committed is that it had the potential to mislead the SAPS and to deny it the right to compare independent quotations. Fortunately, in this instance, the quotes were never used by the SAPS for the purpose of awarding a contract to accused 1.

Count 25: Defeating or obstructing the course of justice
Accused 1 was convicted on the basis of having directly intended to obstruct the course of justice by causing an employee who knew that he had given accused 4 gratifications, to falsely state in that letter that accused 1 had not given accused 4 any gratifications, in circumstances where accused 1 knew that the letter could be used to counter-allegations that his relationship with accused 4 was corrupt. The form of intent was dolus directus.
The purpose of having the letter drafted, signed and kept in a file is patently obvious. It was intended to be used as proof of accused 1’s denial that he gave accused 4 any gratifications. The intention was to dissuade the SAPS from investigating accused 1 and accused 4. It is a direct attempt to steer the police off course. Although there is no evidence that the letter was used by accused 1 or accused 4, the fact that accused 1 persuaded his employee to do a letter of that nature while she knew its content to be false is in itself of grave concern. It speaks volumes about the lengths that accused 1 was prepared to go to in order to avoid being investigated and eventually prosecuted.

Count 26: Fraud
Accused 1 was convicted on the basis of having wrongfully and unlawfully directly intended to defraud Alphera Financial Services by failing to comply with their terms and conditions to the effect that the vehicle had to be kept in accused 1’s possession or under his control; that if the vehicle was lost/stolen, accused 1 would inform Alphera of that fact; that Alphera be informed if the address at which the vehicle is kept is changed.
Accused 1, was therefore convicted of having fraudulently misrepresented the true position concerning in whose possession and where the vehicle was going to be kept and consequently acting to the potential prejudice of Alphera Financial Services. The form of intent was that of dolus directus.
Accused 1, a businessman who operated two large businesses and who had purchased and/or assisted others in the purchase of motor vehicles, clearly understood the essential terms upon which finance companies usually finance the purchase of motor vehicles that are paid in instalments. The terms and conditions of Alphera are not unique. The condition that the lawful possessor, namely, the credit receiver, must have the vehicle under his control or in his possession for the duration of the agreement was known to accused 1, hence he didn’t notify Alphera when Petersen failed to pay him and failed to return the vehicle. I accept the submissions made on accused 1’s behalf that he ultimately paid Alphera in full. That was what he was legally bound to do in terms of the agreement he had entered into with Alphera. Nonetheless, accused 1 operated in a manner  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 878
  where he did not place a high premium on truthfulness and honest dealings. In the event that the SAPS were unable to recover the vehicle, the fraud would have been to the actual prejudice of Alphera, hence the conviction is based on potential prejudice to Alphera.

Count 27: Defeating or obstructing the course of justice
Accused 1 was convicted of having directly intended to defeat the course of justice by withholding from the SAPS the true position concerning how the vehicle came to be in the Durban area and how it initially came to be in the possession of one, Petersen. Accused 1 was convicted on this count on the basis of dolus directus.
Even the slightest bending of the truth is an untruth. When that misrepresentation is made to the SAPS on who the declarant of the statement relies for assistance, it can result in an undue preference being given to the case, which is what happened here. It served accused 1’s interests well to omit certain salient aspects of his agreement with Petersen from the statement he made to the SAPS. That omission enabled accused 1 to have the SAPS Durban search for his vehicle while they were brought under the impression that the vehicle had been unlawfully removed from Cape Town to Durban whereas in truth it was removed lawfully to Durban with the full knowledge and consent of accused 1. Accused 5 admitted in his plea, to having unlawfully prioritised the investigation into the removal of the vehicle.

Accused 3
I was informed belatedly by accused 1’s Counsel that the close corporation that is accused 3 has been deregistered shortly before the conviction.
There is accordingly no merit in imposing sentence on accused 3.

Accused 4
Accused 4 was convicted of corruption on the grounds that he accepted the gratifications given to him by accused 1, 2 and 3 to the value of R67 329,50 and he caused a letter to be drafted in which he declared that accused 1 was a person of good standing and was not under investigation by the SAPS. His plea was tendered on the basis of dolus eventualis and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it was accepted as such.
Accused 4 caused the letter of good standing to be drafted in circumstances where accused 1 was the subject of an inquiry and investigation.

Accused 5
Accused 5 was convicted of corruption on the basis that he accepted gratifications from accused 1, 2 and 3 to the value of R3324,60 and because accused 5 made the following interventions for accused 1:
He sent a certain Lieutenant to certify documents for accused 1 at Parow Arms;
He opened a case for use of a vehicle without the owner’s consent for accused 1, he took accused’s 1 statement and he gave instructions to officers under his command to expedite the investigation;
He personally and by directing officers under his command, gave accused 1’s complaints of service delivery, preferential treatment. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 879
His plea was tendered on the basis of dolus eventualis and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it was accepted as such.
Accused 5’s attorney submitted that the interventions preceded the gratifications and were not covered by PRECCA. This submission was made in replying argument on the last day of argument.
The said submission was made despite accused 5 having pleaded guilty to corruption under PRECCA for interventions that were made before he received the gratifications.
On accused 5’s behalf it was argued that because he received the gratifications on 11 May 2013, the court could only have regard to interventions that accused 5 made after 5 May 2013 and not to those made before he received the gratifications.
The argument goes that the plain, ordinary meaning of section 4(1)(b) of PRECCA, prohibits gratifications to public officers so that they will, in the future, act in a manner that is unlawful, as proscribed. The section provides that:
Offences in respect of corrupt activities relating to public officers (1) Any –
Person who, directly or indirectly, gives or agrees or offers to give any gratification to a public officer, whether for the benefit of that public officer or for the benefit of another person,

  In order to act, personally or by influencing another person so to act, in a manner –

 (i) That amounts to the –

 (aa) illegal, dishonest, and authorized, incomplete, or biased; or

 (bb) misuse or selling of information or material required in the course of the, exercise, carrying out or performance of any powers, duties or functions arising out of a constitutional, statutory, contractual or any other legal obligation;

 (ii) that amounts to –

 (aa) the abuse of a position of authority;

 (bb) a breach of trust; or

 (cc) the violation of a legal duty or a set of rules;

 (iii) designed to achieve an unjustified result; or

 (iii) that amounts to any other and authorized or improper inducement to do or not to do anything, is guilty of the offence of corrupt activities relating to public offices.”


The ordinary meaning of the word “in order to act. . . ” has to take account of the context in which it is used in the section. It’s function in the section is that of a purposive clause that complements the main clause. The subject of the purposive clause is dependent on and gleaned from the main clause. If one asks who must act, the answer will be obtained from the main clause. The words under consideration do not have a specific verb form as in a present, future or past verb form in that it is preceded by a preposition which makes it an infinitive without a verb tense. The verb occurs in the relevant phrase in an uninflected form. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 880
On the argument presented on behalf of accused 1 and 5, the words include a present infinitive and future meaning. That limit sought to be placed on the phrase so as to exclude a past tense meaning makes no sense. If the phrase covers present tense and future tense, then an interpretation that includes past tense is equally grammatically feasible.
Counsel for accused 1 submitted that legislation is not meant to operate retroactively. That is a trite proposition and not one which I seek to challenge. However, the issue raised is not the retroactive operation of PRECCA but rather whether the relevant phrase is meant to include interventions that precede gratifications. An interpretation which finds that it does include interventions made before gratifications is not a finding that the interventions must have pre-dated the legislation itself.
The gratifications in the present case, provides rewards for past interventions, but were in addition, given to induce future actions. The accused have admitted foreseeing that they could induce future interventions. In this sense the gratifications that are given both as rewards for past interventions and to induce future interventions are criminalized. Gratifications given and received with both a retrospective and prospective intention are classic “retainer” gratifications. In those instances, it is unhelpful to isolate whether the intention is only retrospective or prospective, because the intention in retainer corruption classically, is always both.
When read in the context of the section as a whole, the phrase means that the provider of the gratification must have the intention to give the gratification so that the receiver of the gratification may act in a particular manner. It doesn’t exclusively mean that the receiver must have already acted at the time when the gratification was made nor does it mean that gratification and the act must be contemporaneous, in the sense of attributing a present tense, nor does it mean that the act must be made in the future. The phrase is broad enough to include present, past and future interventions.
Accused 5, in his plea, admits that during his employment with SAPS, he received many requests for assistance and complaints from different business forums, institutions, foreign communities and private individuals that required his personal attention. As a result of these engagements, he became familiar with accused 1 and they became friends. He discovered that accused 1 was always involved with the police in various helpful ways, especially through sponsorships and donations as well as other community upliftment projects. He always saw accused 1 as a friend of the police.
This admission shows that the special treatment which accused 5 accorded to accused 1 prior to the petrol payments was motivated by accused 1’s generosity to the police in general.
This Court dealt in the judgment on conviction with all the interventions in favour of accused 1. The evidence regarding accused 5’s acts or omissions which amount to interventions are discussed in the following paragraphs of the judgment:
Paragraph 22 – where Hansraj said that accused 5 told her that she called the meeting whereas she called a meeting with him and not with accused 1 and accused 5 at that stage was content  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 881
   with accused 1 being present in the meeting. Where accused 5 allowed accused 1 to speak abusively and in a threatening manner to Vlok and only at the end of the meeting after Hansraj told accused 1 that he can’t behave that way, did accused 5 follow suit and tell accused 1 that it was wrong to behave like that and he should leave;
Paragraph 25 – Where accused 5 called a meeting ostensibly with business people in the area and it turned out to be a meeting at accused 1’s business premises with accused 1 being the only business person present and accused 5 allowed accused 1 to question Hansraj about his perceived lack of sufficient police patrols around his business premises and he allowed accused 1 to suggest that certain police members must be transferred from their posts;
Paragraphs 27 and 28 – where accused 5 requested that Brigadier Hansraj, the station commissioner must personally attend to an alleged burglary at the premises of accused 1 whereas lower rank officers would normally have attended;
Paragraph 60 – where Vlok said that accused 5 initially sat by and allowed accused 1 to speak to him abusively;
The court addressed the consequences of the interventions, as described by Brigadier Hansraj, in the following paragraphs:
Paragraph 31 – It bothered Brigadier Hansraj, due to her encounters with some of the interventions, that accused 1 expected preferential treatment and that he had influence in and knowledge of police affairs;
Paragraph 32 – Brigadier Hansraj did not feel comfortable raising her concerns with accused 4 or 5, who were her superior officers because of her perception that accused 1 had a cosy relationship with them and it subsequently transpired by their own admission, that they indeed had a close relationship with one another;
Paragraph 34 – Brigadier Hansraj registered her inquiry docket against all the accused, including accused 5, although she didn’t mention the names of accused 4 and 5 at that stage. She complained of accused 1’s expectations of preferential treatment from all of the accused, including accused 5.
The court at paragraph 107 evaluated the evidence and concluded that it sketched a milieu in which accused 1 had more knowledge than others of the SAPS and that he sought to utilize that knowledge and his friendships and relationships with the other accused to obtain preferential treatment.
At paragraph 137 the court found that accused 1 to 3 gave and accused 4 to 6, received the gratifications, therefore accused 4 to 6 foresaw that they or others under their influence, would provide preferential treatment to accused 1 to 3 and that accused 1 foresaw that members of the SAPS would do his bidding. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 882
At paragraph 203 the court found further that the evidence “. . . made out a case for accused 1 to 6 to meet concerning corrupt activities and the influence peddling that accompanied that offence.”
It is clear that the court found that all the acts of intervention, whether or not they occurred before or after the gratifications were given or received, were relevant in concluding that the gratifications were given and received corruptly and with the requisite intent, as the court found they were.
Since the court has found that all the acts of intervention are relevant to the convictions, it follows that they are relevant to sentence, irrespective of when they occurred.

Accused 6
He was convicted of corruption on the grounds that he received from accused 1, 2, and 3 gratifications to the value of R24 601,44 and because he made the following interventions for accused 1:
He expressed his willingness to go after hours to an address in Gugulethu to check on a vehicle allegedly used in the burglary and theft at the apartment of accused 1’s brother, in the event that the cluster commander of Milnerton didn’t have anyone available to do so;
He introduced accused 1 to Warrant Officer Knoetzen in his office so that the Warrant Officer could assist accused 1’s daughter with an appeal concerning an application for a firearm licence;
He asked accused 1 if he had spare tickets for the Cape Town Jazz festival for a Lieutenant General in Mpumalanga which tickets accused 1 then gave to the Lieutenant General;
He introduced accused 1 to Captain Hendricks so that the latter could assist accused 1 with an application to temporarily possess a firearm;
He requested Constable De Jager to hand over a Norinco Pistol to accused 1 in terms of an application to temporarily possess a firearm;
He arranged an appointment for a Mr Ross, an associate of accused 1, with a designated police officer who deals with firearms to assist him with an application for a fire arm licence;
He asked Warrant Officer Knoetzen to make printouts of accused 1 and his wife’s fire-arm registrations to see whether accused 1 would qualify for another fire-arm;
He called the detective commander at Phoenix SAPS in KZN province to assist accused 1 with obtaining clearance and handing over to accused 1 his Polo Vehicle which was recovered and kept in police custody at the time.
His plea was tendered on the basis of dolus eventualis and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it was accepted as such.
When a senior police officer refers a friend/relative to a junior officer for assistance ahead of other people requiring assistance, that referral carries  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 883
  with it, the implication that the junior officer must render the assistance. The referral is not devoid of influence and power.

Nature of the offence of corruption
Accused 4, 5 and 6’s knowledge and understanding of the offence of corruption in general, ought to have been sufficiently detailed because each of them held senior leadership positions in the SAPS at the time when they committed the offences.
In the case of accused 4 he held the most senior leadership position in the SAPS in the province, namely that of Provincial Commissioner of Police.
In the case of accused 5, he was the cluster commander of the Bellville Cluster at the time.
Accused 6 was the Station Commissioner at Parow Police Station.
In addition, there have been several high - profile corruption cases which were widely publicised, two of which are cited as authorities herein. The case of the former National Commissioner of Police, namely S v Selebi would have come to the attention of police officers in leadership positions. The accused in the Selebi case publicly opted for an explanation of an alleged corruptor being his friend. Despite that explanation, he was convicted.
Accused 4, 5 and 6 have among them approximately 80 years service in the SAPS. It beggars belief that none of them thought that receiving financial assistance from accused 1 and then according him favours or preferential treatment in their capacity as police officers, constituted corruption. Accused 4 and 6 informed their respective probation officers that they didn’t believe that they were committing corruption. In the case of accused 4 and 6, they allegedly believed that they were merely accepting financial support from a relative or longstanding friend.
It is inconceivable, that senior members of the police force would not have realised that they were committing corruption.
The factors that would most likely have driven accused 4 to 6 to commit corruption ought to have been identified and addressed by the accused. When any individual finds himself/herself in a situation where he/she needs to accept gratifications, then it is either attributable to greed, living beyond one’s means or a catastrophic event which caused that person not to be able to balance his/her budget. In this case the court has simply not been told by the accused why they deemed it necessary to accept those gratifications.
Nor did the accused take the court into their confidence concerning why they deemed it prudent to make the interventions they have acknowledged, to and on behalf of accused 1.
It is incomprehensible that accused 4 to 6, all of who were reared in humble socio-economic conditions, who succeeded in acquiring further education and skills and were able to forge admirable career paths for themselves, would place their careers, reputation, standing and liberty in jeopardy.
The evidence on record which the defence thoroughly challenged during cross-examination sketches a picture of accused 1 openly and brazenly  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 884
  boasting to several police officers that he has a close relationship with accused 4 and 5, how he could have lower rank police officers chastised and even punished by accused 4 and/or 5.
Accused 1 levelled a threat of that nature against Colonel Vlok in the presence of accused 5. accused 1 had no qualms about throwing his weight around in the presence of accused 5.
It is no coincidence that the offences occurred while accused 4 and 5 held positions of authority and power over officers that accused 1 threatened and harassed. Public power is not meant to be wielded for personal satisfaction or gain. It is a trust and responsibility bestowed upon the holder of that power which must be exercised responsibly, for the benefit of society as a whole and in accordance with the prescripts that define how that power is to be exercised.
In R v Lavenstein4 the court said the following concerning the exercise of public power:

“If the official has a discretion, what the law requires of an official is to exercise that discretion with sole regard to the public interest. That is his duty. That is the act that he has to do. When once he exercises his discretion with regard to the private interests of any individual, he is doing an act in conflict with his duty, and that, to my mind, is the only reasonable interpretation of the words of the statute. . . any other construction will have the extraordinary and ridiculous results I have mentioned, viz: that you can bribe officials to any extent as long as you can show that the actual thing they did was in the public interest. . . ”

When the holders of public power engage in corruption, they not only impugn their own integrity. They also bring the standing of the office and position they hold into disrepute.
In an organisation such as the SAPS, the failure of senior leaders to remain ethical, scrupulous and honest, lowers the morale of lower ranking officers who serve under the command of such senior leaders. Rank and file police officers are often the coalface of the SAPS with who members of society interact. Society must have confidence in the integrity of the SAPS and they must be reassured that the morale of the SAPS is intact.
Accused 1 peddled influence in order to receive preferential treatment and favours. He used the SAPS as his own fiefdom. In so doing, he squandered and pre-occupied valuable and already stretched SAPS resources in petty squabbles, power – mongering meetings and to do his bidding generally. accused 4, 5 and 6 created a context in which accused 1 could do so by fostering a close relationship with accused 1 well knowing that accused 1 wasn’t averse to requesting favours from them and using their close relationship to have other officers extend special treatment to him.
All too often corruptors or potential corruptors labour under the illusion that anything and anyone has a price and influence can be bought. That notion is inimical to not only the moral fabric of society but also the consolidation, protection and sustainability of hard-won freedoms enshrined in the Constitution. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 885
Accused 1’s psychiatrist’s testimony is that accused 1 has a low level of education, he lived by a code of altruism where he gave charitably to the SAPS, churches mosques and the community as a whole and he therefore didn’t consider his actions to be unlawful at the time.
An ordinary member of society knows that it is unlawful to do favours for the police and to expect favours in return, irrespective of whether the giving and receiving is contemporaneous and charitably driven or not.
Accused 1 not only expected his co-accused to assist him preferentially, he also expected other police officers of a lower rank and under the command of his co-accused to give him preferential treatment and to bend the rules as it were for him. A prime example of this can be found in the evidence of Wilson where accused 1 refused to accept that the store was a crime scene and he would have to wait for his goods. Instead, he demanded that it be given to him immediately because of who he was.
Contrary to the opinion of his psychiatrist, accused 1 wasn’t merely expecting preferential treatment from his co-accused to who he had given gratifications, but he expected preferential treatment from all police members because he had given generously to the SAPS and to some of its members. If the court was to accept that in accused 1’s mind it was a case of “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours” then police services would be capable of being bought by individuals.
The policy of the SAPS to foster good relations with local business owners in order to improve service delivery, should contain sufficient checks and balances to ensure that the SAPS is not manipulated into becoming the personal service of a few at the expense of the majority.
Counsel for accused 1 to 3 and Counsel for accused 6 impressed upon me the scenario where one socialises with members of the police force and when one’s home is burgled, the first and natural reaction would be to call those officers that one socialises with. The crisp answer to that situation postulated is thus: one ought to know better than to compromise one’s friends by expecting them to do favours and to act beyond the laid down procedures for reporting incidents of crime. To even postulate that situation as natural and normal is unacceptable because the ethical, moral and legal standard for interaction with law enforcement officers should be consistent and it should therefore be the same, irrespective of whether one socialises with them or not.
A policeman’s legal and ethical lot is no more onerous than that of a judicial officer. No friend of a judicial officer could claim that it is natural and normal to expect preferential treatment because of that friendship any more than a friend of a police officer should.
While there are degrees of corruption in that the amounts involved in each instance may vary, the severity of the interventions may vary, the notion of corrupting and being corruptible when it involves corruptees who exercise public power and who hold positions of lawful authority, is untenable.
The defence argued that accused 1 requests were that his co-accused and the other officers to who he had given gratifications were merely expected to do their official duties and in so doing, they were not being  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 886
  asked to act unlawfully, therefore their interventions were not as severe as those in the Selebi case.
Snyman says the following concerning bribery for the performance of official duties:5
The fact that what X requested Y to do accorded with Y’s duties, and that X accordingly did not request Y to do something ‘improper’. In the common law this consideration afforded neither X nor Y a defence. The reason for this rule was that it was bribery even to ‘bribe an official to do her duty’. Thus, if X had given public prosecutor Y an amount of money in order to prosecute Z of some crime, but Y would in any event have prosecuted Z because she had the power to do so and also because there was sufficient evidence at her disposal of the commission of the crime by Z, both X and Y would have rendered themselves guilty of the crime. It is submitted that the same principle applies to the 2004 Act.”
In S v van der Westhuizen,6 the court held as follows:

“It is a crime to bribe an official to do his duty. . . and it is a crime for an official to accept money in return for doing his duty. As has been said, it is immaterial that the solicited action is in the public interest: it is contrary to the public interest to secure a public benefit by bribery.”

In Ex parte Tayob,7 the court said the following:

“I do not think the learned Judge erred in describing the making of gifts to officials. . . as something done “to buy a more favourable disposition than that which would come into being on its own or perhaps is due without the presents”.

In S v Shaik and others8, it was held that:

“The seriousness of the offence of corruption cannot be over emphasized. It offends against the rule of law and the principles of good governance. It lowers the moral tone of a nation and negatively affects development and the promotion of human rights. As a country we have travelled a long and tortuous road to achieve democracy. Corruption threatens our constitutional order. We must make every effort to ensure that corruption with its putrefying effects is haltered. Courts must send out an unequivocal message that corruption will not be tolerated and that punishment will be appropriately severe.”

In S v Selebi9 it was said that:
Corruption can be likened to a cancer. It operates insidiously destroying the moral fibre of the nation. When it is discovered the damage has already been done. Whilst the particular act of corruption may be excised, just as a malignancy may be removed in a surgical intervention, society is not what it was prior to the corrupt act. The roots of justice and integrity, so vital in a fair and democratic society, have been permanently scarred by the corrupt act. The moral fibre of society has to be re-built after the excision of the corruption. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 887
Corruption by members of a police force can never be tolerated. It is the very antithesis of what a police force stands for. It precludes the police force from effectively carrying out its constitutional function. So much more so when it is the head of the police force that is corrupt.”
I need only add, so much more when it is the head of the police force in the province and a cluster commander.

Evidence concerning statistics for corruption cases
The court called for evidence to be led concerning how many cases of corruption committed by government and police officials were reported nationally and in the Western Cape and how many resulted in convictions.

Mr Marius Basson of the NPA, Western Cape
He submitted an affidavit that was handed in with the consent of the defence. He produced statistics of reported cases, convictions and sentences imposed. The court did not however request statistics concerning the sentences imposed because sentence is ultimately the exercise of judicial discretion.
He listed convictions for corruption in the Western Cape Courts for the calendar years 2014–2017 as well as for the first three months of 2018, ie until March 2018.
Convictions over the period of 4 years and 3 months are as follows:
For the period of 2014 to 2017 (excluding 3 months of 2018) the national statistics are as follows:

  Most of the convictions relate to offences committed in terms of PRECCA.

Adv J Schutte of the NPA head office
He provided national statistics for corruption committed by government officials for the government’s financial years 2013 to 2017.
Convictions of government employees for corruption, nationally for the period 2013 to 2017, is 693.
There is an increasing trend, made up as follows:
 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 888

Col P Bergh of the DPCI, SAPS, Western Cape
SAPS registered 47 investigations arising from complaints of corruption allegedly committed by SAPS officials in the Western Cape for the government’s financial years 2014 to 2018.
The number of cases registered each year in the Western Cape by SAPS have not increased significantly.
Bergh didn’t provide statistics of how many registered cases resulted in convictions.

M Seseko of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (“IPID”)
Mr M Seseko, the head of investigations at IPID, testified as follows:
He produced statistics on all complaints IPID has received of corruption against SAPS officials in the whole of the South Africa for the five years from 2012/2013 to 2017/2018. Those were 17 complaints of corruption.
IPID statistics for corruption committed by SAPS officials is in addition to SAPS statistics. When that amount is added to the SAPS statistic of 47 for the four years from 2013/2014 – the total Western Cape incidence becomes 64, which excludes the SAPS statistic for 2012/2013.
The total incidence of IPID corruption complaints against SAPS officials for the whole of the country over the five years is 568.
Mr Sesoko described how difficult corruption investigations against SAPS officials are. He ascribed, the difficulty to, inter alia, many complainants being reluctant either to make complaints or to be identified and to testify. The majority of complaints (320 of the 569) are then categorised as “unknown”, as the perpetrators can’t be identified.
Despite those investigative difficulties, he defended his trend analysis which reflect that the incidence of complaints have increased over the five years.

The purpose of remorse as a mitigating factor
Demonstrations of actual remorse must be taken into account by a sentencing court because it represents an acknowledgement of the impact of the offence on the complainant, the accused and on society. It therefore augurs well for an accused person’s prospects of meaningful rehabilitation.
Various indicators of remorse are present in this case. Those are as follows:
The change of plea from not guilty to guilty; and
Expressions of regret uttered to the probation officer and the social worker in the case of all the accused;
In S v Matyityi 2011 (1) SACR 40 (SCA) at paragraph 13 [also reported at [2011] 2 All SA 424 (SCA) – Ed] the court said the following concerning remorse:
Remorse was said to be manifested in him pleading guilty and apologising, through his Counsel (who did so on his behalf from the bar) to both Ms KD and Mr Cannon. It has been held, quite correctly, that a plea of guilty in the face of an open and shut case against an accused person is a neutral factor. The evidence linking the respondent to the crimes was overwhelming. . . .There is, moreover, a chasm  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 889
  between regret and remorse. Many accused persons might well regret their conduct but that does not without more translate to genuine remorse. Remorse is a gnawing pain of conscience for the plight of another. Thus genuine contrition can only come from an appreciation and acknowledgement of the extent of one’s error. Whether the offender is sincerely remorseful and not simply feeling sorry for himself or herself at having been caught is a factual question. It is to the surrounding actions of the accused rather than what he says in court that one should rather look. In order for the remorse to be a valid consideration, the penitence must be sincere and the accused must take the court fully into his or her confidence. Until and unless that happens the genuineness of the contrition alleged to exist cannot be determined. After all, before a court can find that an accused person is genuinely remorseful, it needs to have a proper appreciation of inter alia: what motivated the accused to commit the deed; what has since provoked his or her change of heart; and whether he or she does indeed have a true appreciation of the consequences of those actions. There is no indication that any of this, all of which was peculiarly within the respondent’s knowledge, was explored in this case.”

Applicability of prescribed minimum sentence legislation
Accused 4 and 6 whose gratifications were R67 329,50 and R24601,44 respectively and who were police officers at the time of the offences would ordinarily have been subject to the application of section 52(2)(a)(i) read with paragraph (c)(i) of Part II of Schedule 2 of Act 105 of 1997 which prescribes a minimum sentence of 15 years imprisonment where the amount of gratifications exceed R10 000 for law-enforcement officials.
The indictment however contains the suggestion that the threshold for the applicability of the minimum sentence is gratifications to the value of R100 00. The indictment also contemplated that the minimum sentence applied because it was alleged that the accused acted in concert as a syndicate or enterprise. The state however led no evidence concerning the allegation of common purpose and the accused were all acquitted on the counts relating to the Prevention of Organised Crime Act (“POCA”).
During negotiations between the state and the defence for a change of plea from not guilty to guilty, the state overlooked the fact that the threshold for the minimum sentence was R10 000 and held the view that since the POCA charges would fall away, the minimum sentence would no longer apply once the plea had changed. The State accordingly informed accused 4, who was unrepresented at the time, in writing that if he changed his plea, the minimum sentence would not apply to him. accused 4 submitted that he was induced to change his plea by that representation.
Most cases concerning whether a court ought to apply the minimum sentence concern situations where it would be unfair to do so because the accused was not adequately warned or not warned at all prior to his plea, that the minimum sentence applied. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 890
Khobane v S10 is one such case where the Supreme Court of Appeal held as follows:
In Makatu, Lewis JA accepted the need to adopt an approach that was ‘neither absolute nor inflexible’. In S v Ndlovu; S v Sibisi, which was cited with approval by this Court in S v Mabuza and others, it was said that:

  ‘[I]t will not be essential to inform [the accused person] that he is facing the possibility of a substantial prison sentence or a sentence which may be “materially prejudicial” if he can reasonably be expected already to be aware of this.’

  A crucial question, if the charge sheet omits a reference to the Act, is whether the accused nevertheless had a fair trial if the sentence is determined in terms thereof. This was made clear in S v Ndlovu (paragraph 12):

  ‘[w]here the State intends relying upon the sentencing regime created by the Act a fair trial will generally demand that its intention pertinently be brought to the attention of the accused at the outset of the trial, if not in the charge sheet then in some other form, so that the accused is placed in a position to appreciate properly in good time the charge that he faces as well as its possible consequences’.”

In the event that the court applies the prescribed minimum sentence, the argument advanced on behalf of accused 6 is that the court may suspend part of the minimum sentence despite the authority in S v Seedat11 where it was held as follows:
If it was the intention of the High Court to invoke the provisions of section 297(4), it could do so, as it had already accepted that there were substantial and compelling circumstances that justified a deviation from the prescribed minimum sentence. However, in order for that sentence to be competent, the court would have to impose a sentence for a specific term of imprisonment. The court could then order that the operation of a part of that term of imprisonment be suspended for a specific period not exceeding five years on any condition, including compensation. This is not what the court did. It instead stated that ‘the sentencing of the appellant is suspended for a period of five years on the following conditions . . .In so doing, it did not impose a specific sentence or a specific term of imprisonment. Such a sentence is not competent in terms of section 297 and there is no provision in law permitting a court to so suspend the sentencing of an accused. The unintended consequence occasioned by the error committed by the High Court was that there was no competent sentence imposed on the appellant.
There is another reason why the sentence imposed by the High Court cannot stand. Section 297(4) envisages that only a part of the sentence should be suspended and not the whole sentence. So, even if the court sought to impose a suspended sentence, it could not suspend the whole sentence. For all those reasons the High Court thus committed an error on a question of law and the sentence it imposed stands to be set aside. It thus remains for this Court to consider an appropriate sentence.” 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 891
It was submitted on behalf of accused 6 that Seedat’s case is in conflict with the Hildebrand12 and Malgas13 cases.
In Hildebrand the court held as follows concerning a sentencing court’s exercise of its discretion when deviating from the prescribed minimum sentence:
Section 51 of the Act provides for the minimum sentences for certain specified offences. Once a court finds that the offence for which an accused has been convicted falls under offences specified by section 51 of the Act, then that Court has no option but to impose the minimum sentence prescribed unless it can find substantial and compelling circumstances. However, once it is satisfied that there are substantial and compelling circumstances which justify the imposition of a sentence other than the one prescribed by the Act, it can impose any sentence which it regards as appropriate (section 51(3) of the Act). This is so because as this Court held in S v Malgas [2001] ZASCA 30; 2001 (2) SA 1222 (SCA) paragraph 25A:

  Section 51 has limited but not eliminated the courts’ discretion in imposing sentence in respect of offences referred to in Part 1 of Schedule 2 (or imprisonment for other specified periods for offences listed in other parts of Schedule 2).’

Section 51(5) of the Act reads:

  ‘The operation of a minimum sentence imposed in terms of this section shall not be suspended as contemplated in section 297(4) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act 51 of 1977).’

It should be clear that section 51(5) refers to ‘a minimum sentence imposed in terms of this section’. Self-evidently, this section does not apply to sentences imposed after a finding that substantial and compelling circumstances exist, because such a sentence is not one imposed in terms of section 51. The sentence imposed by the regional magistrate accordingly did not fall within the restrictive provisions of section 51(5).”
I am not convinced that Seedat is in conflict with Hildebrand and Malgas. The former concerned a sentence which the magistrate sought to impose where no term of imprisonment was given and where the magistrate erroneously believed that he could not suspend part of the sentence which was in any event a deviation from the prescribed minimum sentence.
In Hildebrand and Malgas’ cases, the court confirmed that a sentencing court’s discretion is not eliminated by the prescribed minimum sentence once it is deviated from.
I accept Counsel for accused 6 and the state’s submission that should this Court find that the prescribed minimum sentence applies and if the court finds substantial and compelling circumstances do exist to justify a deviation from that sentence, I would retain the discretion to impose any competent sentence that I consider to be appropriate.
In the case of accused 4, since the state mistakenly misrepresented the position concerning the applicability of the prescribed minimum sentence  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 892
  prior to him changing his plea, it would be substantively and substantially unfair to apply the prescribed minimum sentence and so I decline to do so.
The prescribed minimum sentence does not apply to accused 5 because the amount of gratifications that he received is less than R10 000.
Accused 6 fulfils the jurisdictional requirements for the prescribed minimum sentence because he was a law enforcement officer and he received gratifications in excess of R10 000.
I am however persuaded that the ordinary mitigating factors applicable to accused 6 weighed against the role he played and the nature of the offence constitute substantial and compelling circumstances to justify a deviation from the prescribed minimum sentence.

Mitigating factors that could constitute substantial and compelling circumstances
In S v Malgas the court held as follows:
What stands out quite clearly is that the courts are a good deal freer to depart from the prescribed sentences than has been supposed in some of the previously decided cases and that it is they who are to judge whether or not the circumstances of any particular case are such as to justify a departure. However, in doing so, they are to respect, and not merely pay lip service to, the Legislature’s view that the prescribed periods of imprisonment are to be taken to be ordinarily appropriate when crimes of the specified kind are committed. In summary . . . ”
All the accused are first offenders, they have children that are either financially and/or emotionally dependant on them, they have all pleaded guilty, albeit after the trial had ensued for approximately 10 months on the basis of not guilty pleas and they showed varying degrees of remorse.
Defence Counsel were at pains to describe the negative impact of the prosecution and trial upon the accused. Those consequences do not form part of the punishment meted about by the courts. The intention of the criminal justice system is not to punish an accused with the procedure followed in a trial before he/she is sentenced by a court, hence the accused’s rights to a fair trial are constitutionally protected.
The negative media attention, financial hardship occasioned by being prosecuted, the stress and anxiety endured by accused persons and their families are all part of consequences which flow to most accused persons. Those are not mitigating factors per se that Courts are enjoined to take account of when deciding on an appropriate sentence.
Counsel for the defence implored me to have regard to the case of S v M where the Constitutional Court discussed that regard should be had to the best interests of the minor children of the accused who was their primary caregiver. The court held that although the best interests of the child are paramount, this did not mean that they are absolute, and they could be limited by balancing them against other rights in the Bill of Rights.
In this case none of the accused are primary caregivers although they do provide financial assistance to their adult children and in the case of accused 1, to a 17 year old relative. 
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 893
Accused 1’s Counsel argued that accused 1 suffered the loss of ownership of his business which he had to give over to his son and he is now an employee in that business. The evidence is however that he is an employee and a consultant in the business. According to the correctional supervision suitability report, accused 1 decided to change the ownership of the business to his son because his son would be able to obtain credit. Although accused 1 appears to have lost nominal ownership of the business, he is still involved in the business. The business is able to provide for accused 1 and his family’s living requirements. accused 1 receives sufficient remuneration to cover his expenses and his daily needs in an amount of approximately R100 000 per month. He has been described by the probation officer as not being destitute. accused 1 is resilient enough to have transferred his business interests to his son, while retaining beneficial use of the business.
There are indeed mitigating factors present in the personal circumstances of each of the accused but they have to be weighed against the aggravating factors.
The State also seeks the imposition of a sentence under section 276(1)(h). The court is however not bound by any agreement that the State may have made with the accused.
The nature and circumstances in which the offences occurred however, do present aggravating factors because they were perpetrated by and in conjunction with law enforcement officers who are sufficiently knowledgeable about the unlawfulness of corruption and its consequences for the SAPS and the community it serves, when perpetrated by its members.
Not only did accused 4, 5 and 6 receive gratifications, but they also perpetrated acts or omissions of intervention for which they were convicted so that they could unfairly advantage their benefactor, accused 1 at the expense of the public they were meant to serve.
Accused 2, Towbars Cape CC was convicted on counts 3 to 5. The value of the gratifications paid from the funds of accused 2 are in excess of R60 000. The imposition of a fine commensurate with that sum would be an appropriate sentence for accused 2.
In weighing the aggravating features of the commission of the offences as outlined herein, against the mitigating factors, I find that correctional supervision would not send out a sufficiently strong signal of deterrence and sanction nor would it facilitate the accused’s recognition and acceptance of responsibility for the severity of their offences which have dire consequences. Taking account of the individual role that each accused played in the commission of his relevant offence or offences as well as the role they each played in facilitating the offences committed by their co-accused, the impact that those offences had on other officers, the SAPS and society as a whole, the individual accused’s personal circumstances and the positions they occupied at the time, I am of the view that the most appropriate sentence for each offence and for each accused is a term of imprisonment.
As stated previously, courts are enjoined to temper the sentence imposed with a measure of mercy. That mercy is demonstrated by the fact that this  
[2018] 3 All SA 816 (WCC) at 894
  Court will suspend a portion of the term of imprisonment imposed and order part of the sentences imposed to run concurrently.

  It is ordered that:

  The accused are sentenced as follows:


For the State:

WJ Downer SC and XE Jonas

For accused 1–3:

W King SC and Y Rawoot instructed by William Booth Attorneys

For accused 4:

GD Smith instructed by Francois Potgieter en Vennote, Goodwood

Later in the trial:

In person

For accused 5:

Saleem Halday (Attorney) instructed by Halday Attorneys

For accused 6: 

Jacques Lourens

As from 4/09/2017–JA Nortje instructed by Halday Attorneys (till end August 2017) and thereafter, Heide van der Meulen Incorporated 

For accused 7:

JA Nortje instructed by Halday Attorneys (till end August 2017) and thereafter, Heide van der Meulen Incorporated 



Footnotes
1	 1969 (2) SA 537 (A) at 540G [also reported at [1969] 3 All SA 57 (A) – Ed].
2	 R v Swanepoel 1945 AD 444 at 455; S v Rabie 1975 (4) SA 855 (A) at 862A–B [also reported at [1975] 4 All SA 723 (A) – Ed].
3	  At 861B.
4	  1919 TPD 348 at 353; R v Patel 1944 AD 511 at 522.
5	  Snyman Criminal Law (6ed) p 405.
6	  1974 (4) SA 61 (C) at 63E–F.
7	  1990 (3) SA 715 (T) at 722C–D.
8	 2007 (1) SACR 247 (SCA) at para [223] [also reported at [2007] 2 All SA 9 (SCA) – Ed].
9	  [2010] ZAGPJHC 58 at paras [19]–[20].
10	  [2016] ZASCA 124 at [14].
11	  2017 (1) SACR 141 (SCA) at [36] and [37].
12	  Hildebrand v State [2015] ZASCA 174.
13	 S v Malgas 2001 (1) SACR 469 (SCA) [also reported at [2001] 3 All SA 220 (SCA) – Ed].


End of Document