



Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union obo Ramunenyiwa / Sibanye Gold Ltd [2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission For Conciliation, Mediation And Arbitration
Case No: GAJB1454-16
Date: 14/07/2016
Before: R Bracks, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practices — Demotion — Employee demoted after failing to obtain necessary qualification for post within reasonable period — Demotion fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant employee, an engineer, was demoted from her post of Superintendent Rock Engineer to Supervisor Strata Control, with a significant reduction of salary. She claimed that her demotion was unfair. The respondent contended that the applicant had failed to obtain the required certificate within a reasonable time, and that the employee had agreed to a demotion.

The Commissioner noted that a demotion occurs when an employee’s terms and conditions of employment are altered in such as a way as to materially reduce the employee’s remuneration, responsibilities and status. Demotion is permitted, provided it is done fairly. The employee had contended that she had been initially appointed to the post of Superintendent Rock Engineer and that the respondent had unilaterally changed her contract. The Commissioner accepted, however, that the appointment had been conditional on the applicant completing the necessary qualification within a reasonable period. The post was a training position, created to address a shortage of rock engineers. The respondent had attempted to help the employee obtain the necessary qualification. Furthermore, after her appointment the applicant had confirmed that her appointment was provisional. In the light of this, the applicant’s contention that she had not agreed to a demotion was disingenuous. The applicant’s demotion was, accordingly, fair.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration was scheduled for hearing at the CCMA offices in Gauteng at 127 Fox Street Johannesburg on various dates culminating on 4 July 2016. The applicant was represented by Solomon Makhunga and the respondent was represented by Rocco Boshoff. The proceedings were recorded both manually and electronically. 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1288

Issue to be decided
Whether or not the applicant was unfairly demoted.

Background to the issue
The applicant was employed by the respondent on 1 February 2007 as a Superintendent Rock Engineer earning R709 059,05 per annum. It was common cause that she was appointed as a Special Area Officer for Number 4 Shaft which was a development position in 2008. During 2014, meetings were held with the applicant to discuss development plans with her. During 2015, various consultation meetings were held which culminated with the demotion of the applicant to the position of Supervisor Strata Control earning R511 470 at a new grade of C4. She raised a grievance on 7 October 2015 which remained unresolved and resulted in her referral of the matter to the CCMA on 22 January 2016.
It was conciliated on 15 February 2016 when it remained unresolved and was referred to arbitration which is the subject matter of this award.
The parties were allowed to cross-examine and re-examine during the presentation of their evidence as well as present closing arguments in writing. For the sake of brevity the details of this will not be repeated in the award but it should not be construed that it was not considered.

Survey of evidence and argument

Evidence

Documentary
Bundles of documents were submitted labelled “R” and “A” representing respondent’s and applicant’s bundles respectively.

** As noted previously the proceedings were digitally recorded therefore that which appears hereunder constitutes a summary of the evidence deduced by the parties in so far as is relevant for the purpose of this arbitration; it is by no means a minute of what transpired in the course of the proceedings.

Employee’s evidence

The applicant, Mamosebo Frengelina Ramunenyiwa, after having been sworn in testified as follows.

She made reference to various documents in both bundles. Referring to her personal development plan she stated that this had nothing to do with her previous appointment. She then made reference to a memorandum which the Chief Rock Engineer sent to Francois Malan in which reference was made to the severe shortages of qualified rock engineers. The memo further set out a guideline for the promotion of Strata Control Officers to D1 level. She also made reference to her qualifications and her role profile for the position and said she was appointed by Goldfields as a Technical Assistant SF3 which was a development position for the level. She occupied that position for eight years being developed. 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1289
She then made detailed reference to the areas in which she relieved and conducted various other supervisory roles. She then referred to her development plan and commented on various aspects of it stating that she at all times intended obtaining the Chamber of Mines Rock Engineering Ticket pointing out the agreed completion date for this (“A83”). She then referred to her employment history and stated that on 24 August 2015 when she requested a leave form from HR she discovered that she was demoted on 1 August 2015. On further enquiry she also discovered that her salary had been reduced.
She then lodged a grievance on 7 October 2015 because she needed clarity on certain issues. The grievance was not resolved and she referred the matter to the CCMA.
She confirmed that she was given an opportunity by the company to study and to attend certain courses. In respect of the grievance she felt that she was not fairly treated as Sandra Labuschagne who was central to the grievance also organised the chairperson. She explained that at the grievance an objection was raised but it was ignored.
She explained further that she was extremely traumatised by her demotion and referred to the medical certificates from medical practitioners and psychologists; the latter wrote a report about the negative impact of the demotion on the applicant. She also made reference to a dispute she had with the HR Manager regarding the remuneration which she said was not in line with the respondent’s policy.
She referred to “A131” which was the role profile of a Rock Engineer stating the requirements for the position. She then referred to “A38” and compared the requirements of the two. She said “A33” was for D-lower position and “A137” for the upper position. She then went through the rest of her documents starting at “A138” and stated that these indicated the fluctuation of her salary as well as the effect of this on the payment of her personal accounts. She also made reference to her personal development plan which was done for the respondent.
She referred to “R1–28 and 29” which was a draft letter from Adam Mutshinya which advised her that the company had followed a fair process in demoting her. She contended that she saw this letter for the first time at the arbitration hearing. She also questioned the authenticity of the letter as it was not on the company’s letterhead. She finally referred to “R1–2” which was a Notice of Instruction in terms of the Mines Health and Safety Act stating that section 54 of the Act was implemented because of the company’s failure to meet the requirements of having rock engineers that are fully qualified.

Employer’s evidence

The respondent called three witnesses who testified after having been duly sworn in

Daniel Francois Malan testified as follows
He is a Senior Consultant Rock Engineering Manager and Head of Department for the respondent. He confirmed that the applicant had to obtain 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1290
  the Chamber of Mines Rock Engineering Ticket within a reasonable time after her appointment. Her appointment was aimed at retaining rock engineers as they were scarce at the time. He referred to “R7” which were sections of the Mines Health and Safety Act and explained the requirements of these sections in respect of the appointment of competent persons which meant that they have to have Chamber of Mines certificates which is a safety requirement. He made further reference to the fact that only qualified people are entitled to lead evidence in the event of any incidents in the mine. He could not explain how the applicant who was not qualified would have led evidence as she testified.
He then went on to explain the concerns of management that the applicant had not been able to complete her studies towards the ticket. He referred to “R1–5” which was a schedule of targeted dates of the applicant in 2014/2015 to obtain the necessary qualification for the ticket. During 2014 she made no progress. This is indicated by “R1–6”. The applicant was given from 2008 to 2014 to obtain her qualifications because the respondent realised that it was difficult obtaining the qualification; yet there were others who completed it in three years.
The managers were unhappy with this and it was decided to inform the applicant (“R1–8”). At no stage did the applicant dispute the content of the letter. On 26 February 2015 a meeting was held; he made detailed reference to the minutes of that meeting (“R1–9–13”). At the meeting the applicant was requested to propose a reasonable deadline for obtaining the ticket. The respondent indicated that it was willing to allow her to obtain the ticket during 2015 which she agreed was a fair proposal. The applicant was further requested to draft an action plan for obtaining the ticket and it was also agreed on what assistance she would be given. The applicant was further informed that should she not meet the requirements she would be demoted. A document was then signed agreeing on the completion dates (“R1–14”). The witness stated that the minutes were a clear summary of what transpired at the meeting and no objection or concern was expressed by the applicant who agreed that she would pass the exams.
He referred to “R1–15 and 16” which was a letter dated 4 March 2015 which attached the minutes of the February meeting. It confirmed the agreements that were reached. He referred to point two in the letter.
The applicant was called to a second meeting on 24 July 2015. Again reference was made to the fact that it was agreed that she would be demoted and as a result of her inability to achieve the qualification she was going to be demoted with effect from 1 August in terms of the agreement. The Applicant wrote the exam in October 2015 and failed again. He was referred to “R2” which was the Notice of Instruction in terms of section 54 of the Mines Health and Safety Act. He stated that in terms of the notification they were to ensure that a certified rock engineer went underground to investigate complaints and this was a problem as they could not meet this legal requirement without the properly qualified people. He went on to explain the difficulty the respondent experienced in the absence of fully qualified rock engineers. 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1291

Carston Holfelder testified as follows
He works in the ICT Department [sic] and is responsible for the Active Directory Email System. He explained that a user will always have access to his/her account as long as the account is active. He knows this because he is the custodian of the email system and the only person who determines who has access to the accounts. The applicant still has full access to her email account.

Sandra Labuschagne testified as follows
She is the Unit Manager – Priority Case Unit. She was approached by Malan because he was concerned that a number of employees at supervisory level were not able to obtain the qualification and that this needed to happen as quickly as possible. She was part of the consultation with the applicant and recorded the minutes which were a true reflection of what transpired at the meeting. She confirmed that “R1–8” was a letter from Malan and that no objection or dispute was received regarding the letter. She was referred to “R1–10” and pointed out that during the meeting the applicant was reminded that her appointment was conditional. During the meeting there was also a discussion about the fact that the applicant would be demoted if she failed to obtain the qualification. This was in fact the main purpose of the meeting. The applicant was granted the opportunity to obtain the qualification and this was reflected in the discussions (“R1–11”). “R1–14” was a document drafted which reflected the agreement which the incumbents including the applicant were asked to sign.
Following this a letter was done by Malan which was subsequently received by the applicant. In this letter she was required to confirm or dispute the accuracy of the minutes. No dispute was received from the applicant by either her or Malan. If Malan had received a dispute he would have contacted the witness. She referred to “R1–21–22” and said it was the minute of a meeting which took place in July 2015. She made particular reference to “R1–22” and said its content was never disputed by the applicant. She read the content of the document into the record. “R1–23” which was a letter dated 24 July 2015 was attached to the minutes and given to the applicant. In this letter she was informed of her demotion. The applicant was aware of this already on 25 July 2015.
She lodged a grievance against her demotion but the witness was not involved in this except for arranging the chairperson a Piet Myburgh. The ER Manager informed the witness that the applicant had walked out of the grievance meeting because she objected to the chairperson on the basis that the witness had organised his appointment and was involved in most of the meetings.

Analysis of evidence and argument
Unfair labour practices are currently regulated by sections 185 and 186 of the LRA. Section 185(b) states that every employee has the right not to be subjected to unfair labour practices, while section 186(2) contains the 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1292
  three remaining residual unfair labour practices and one further unfair labour practice.

  Section 186(2) reads as follows:

“‘Unfair labour practice’ means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –


(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to benefits to an employee;
(b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
(c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
(d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.”
An employer is guilty of an unfair labour practice if the employer commits any form of unfair conduct relating to the promotion, demotion, probation or training of an employee. From this it is clear that three core issues arise. Firstly, a definition of promotion is necessary; secondly, unfair conduct relating to promotions needs to be explained; and thirdly, the remedies that may be granted and the appropriate methods of dispute resolution need to be discussed.

Legal position
According to various legal authorities a demotion usually occurs if the change to the employee’s terms or conditions of employment is such that they result in a material reduction of the employee’s remuneration, responsibility or status. However, demotion can mean a reduction or diminution of dignity, importance, responsibility, power or status even if salary, attendant benefits and rank are retained.
Clearly, the Labour Relations Act permits an employer to demote an employee provided only that this is done fairly. Before a demotion can be fair, it must be justifiable on substantive grounds and must satisfy the requirements of due process. These can be the following:
Demotion – Breach of contract

To demote an employee without his consent constitutes a breach of the employment contract.

Demotion as an alternative to retrenchment

An employer can offer an employee demotion, provided that it is made in the process of a properly conducted retrenchment programme.

Demotion as a disciplinary measure

As a disciplinary measure, demotion is allowed only in circumstances where dismissal is justified but, due to mitigation factors, the employer decides not to dismiss the employee. Before demoting an employee, an employer must follow the same procedure as that required before the dismissal of an employee.

 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1293
In Van der Riet v Leisurenet t/a Health and Racquet Clubs [1998] 5 BLLR 471 (LAC), the Labour Appeal Court held that failure by the employer to consult with an employee prior to his demotion constituted an unfair labour practice. It is, therefore, submitted that demotion should always be preceded by consultation.
Applying the law to the facts, the undisputed evidence was that the applicant was demoted. The date of the demotion is recorded as 1 August 2015, however, there is a dispute as to when it was brought to the applicant’s knowledge. In her challenge, the applicant made reference to the initial contract she signed with the respondent and even in the closing arguments she stated that the initial contract was at all material times binding upon the parties and that at no material times were these terms and conditions changed. As a result, she contends that her demotion was unfair.
On the other hand, the respondent contends that the applicant was appointed to a D-lower position at the time as part of the respondent’s retention strategy to provide for a pipeline and succession plan and that the applicant’s appointment to this position was conditional upon the applicant obtaining the Chamber of Mines certificate in Rock Mechanics. The applicant was to obtain the qualification within a reasonable period from the time of her appointment.
The undisputed evidence was that this was a training position and that the applicant was supposed to obtain the certificate in order to continue to be appointed in that position. Further undisputed evidence was that it was a requirement in terms of the regulations under the Mines Health and Safety Act, section 14.8, that at every underground mine where a risk of rock bursts, rock falls or roof falls exists, and at every other mine where a significant risk of rock bursts, rock falls or roof falls exists, the employer must ensure that the input of a competent person is properly and timeously considered and integrated into mine design, planning and operations. Section 22.14.1(8) of the regulations defines a competent person as one who possesses either the Chamber of Mines Certificate in Rock Mechanics (Metalliferous Mines) or Chamber of Mines Certificate in Rock Mechanics (Coal Mines), whichever is appropriate for the type of mine concerned. Further evidence presented in respect of the need for these qualified Rock Engineers was contained in “R2” which was a Notice of Instruction in terms of section 54 dated 25 July 2015 where the transgression identified was that “The certified Rock Engineer does not investigate rock related complaints underground; the manager appointed in terms of section 3(1)(a) does not investigate rock related complaints underground . . .” The instruction was to “Ensure that all rock engineering complaints are investigated by the certificated Rock Engineer underground at all times; ensure that the certificated Rock Engineer goes underground and conducts routine inspections at least once a week . . .”
It was clear from the evidence that the respondent needed to appoint certified Rock Engineers and that the appointment of the applicant was aimed at addressing that need in the respondent’s operations. The evidence presented showed that various attempts were made by the respondent to assist the applicant to obtain this qualification but to no avail. At 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1294
  these meetings, deadlines were set by the respondent and the applicant and yet the applicant still failed to meet the requirement. “R1–6” showed that between 19 October 2011 and 13 May 2015, the applicant wrote papers 1, 2 and 3 fourteen times accumulatively and failed on every occasion. According to the respondent, the applicant was not the only employee who had to obtain the certificate and it was, therefore, felt that it was proper to demote the applicant considering the leniency it had displayed toward the applicant.
In light of the above, what I need to determine is whether or not the demotion of the applicant was fair considering the argument of her representative that the initial agreement between the parties was unilaterally changed. I have considered this argument and as part of the evidence presented I wish to refer to “R3” which is a provisional letter of appointment which stipulates:

“I refer to the three engagement sessions I have had with all D and E band employees of rock engineering regarding the restructuring of the Gold Fields SA Region, in particular the implementation of the proposed redesigned organisation structures of rock engineering. Furthermore, I wish to confirm that the rock engineering selection committee has provisionally finalised the population of the proposed redesigned organisation structure of our discipline . . . I am pleased to confirm your provisional appointment to the position of Graduate in Training Rock Engineering . . . the implementation of the proposed redesigned organisation structure of Rock Engineering, your appointment is effective 1 October 2010… Furthermore, the company will enter into discussions with you to finalise the terms and conditions of your appointment as well as your new role profile. You are required to give the company a written confirmation of your acceptance or otherwise of the provisional appointment by 30 September 2010 as the company requires a clear indication from you as to whether you will accept the position or not . . .”

  The applicant had signed acceptance of this.

From the above it is clear that by accepting the new appointment new terms and conditions applied to the applicant and therefore it cannot be correct when it is argued that the terms and conditions of the applicant’s initial contract were still applicable as they were clearly superseded by her acceptance of the new terms and conditions. Furthermore, from the evidence presented I am persuaded that the respondent had bent over backwards to accommodate the applicant. This is evident from the number of meetings where the deadlines were changed in order to ensure that the applicant is given sufficient time to meet the requirements for the certificate. At these meetings, the respondent also constantly warned the applicant that her failure to obtain the certificate would result in demotion.
I find the applicant’s contention that she did not agree to the demotion disingenuous as it is clear from the minutes of the meetings and the letters confirming those minutes that the applicant was given an opportunity to challenge the accuracy of the minutes. It was the applicant’s further contention that she had objected to the minutes but she could present no evidence for this. It is a trite principle of our law of evidence that he who alleges must prove. The applicant clearly failed to do so. 
[2016] 12 BALR 1287 (CCMA) at 1295
The applicant further stated that she only became aware of her demotion on 24 August 2015. Once again this is not supported by the evidence which clearly shows that at the meeting of 24 July 2015 (“R1–23 and 24”) the minutes indicate that a letter of that same date was handed to the applicant. In the penultimate paragraph of that letter it states “Unfortunately you have made no progress and as a consequence you will now be demoted to a CU position effective from 1 August 2015 as per the agreement outlined above.” The letter went on to state “We want to emphasise that this does not prevent you from writing these exams in future again and you can continue with attempts to obtain the required COM certificate qualification.”
From the evidence presented I am satisfied that it is a legal requirement in terms of the Mines Health and Safety Act that Rock Engineers need to be competent persons in order to be appointed, ie they need to be certified. In order to be certified a person would be required to obtain the certificate of the Chamber of Mines. It is clear that the applicant did not meet this requirement despite being given a period of around five years to do so. There is no doubt in my mind that the applicant was aware that she was a graduate trainee during the time of her appointment and that in order to be fully qualified she needed to obtain the certificate.
In the premise, I am not persuaded that the demotion of the applicant was unfair. I am further persuaded that the applicant was at all material times aware that her failure to obtain the qualification would result in her demotion and that she had agreed to this in the meetings between herself and the respondent. Despite her denial that she had agreed, she failed to present me with any evidence showing that she objected when she was told that failure to obtain the certificate would result in her demotion.
Regarding her grievance, the undisputed evidence was that the applicant had left the process because she objected to the chairperson that was appointed. While I sympathise with the applicant’s sentiments, by walking out of the grievance meeting she was the author of her own demise as she was the one who referred the grievance. What she should have done was to allow the process to proceed and to object afterward if she found the process was unfair.
For the reasons stated above, I find the applicant failed to discharge the onus showing that the respondent had committed an unfair labour practice.

Award
The matter against the respondent is dismissed.

The following case was referred to in the above award:


End of Document