



South African Liberated Public-Sector Workers Union obo Zodwa / Special Investigating Unit – KZN [2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: KNDB13263-17
Date: 27/10/2019
Before: LW De Beer, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Demotion — What constitutes — Employee removed from post to which she had been promoted but remaining on same salary — Removal constituting demotion.
Unfair labour practice — Demotion — Employer unilaterally removing employee from post to which she had been promoted — Demotion unfair.
Unfair labour practice — Promotion — Employer formally appointing employee to position as head of area, but claiming that this amounted to mere “change of role", as opposed to promotion — Employee’s appointment constituting promotion.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was initially appointed as a programme manager by the respondent, but was elevated to the position of regional head in Gauteng. She was then transferred to KwaZulu-Natal to help out with challenges being faced in that province, and was subsequently appointed to act in the capacity of regional head of KZN and paid an acting allowance until a permanent provincial head was appointed, whereupon she was told to resume the position of programme manager. The applicant claimed that she had been unfairly demoted. The respondent denied that the applicant had been appointed as provincial head and that her “role" had merely been changed.

The Commissioner held that the first issue in dispute was whether the applicant had ever been promoted. Although she had not been appointed as regional head through the normal processes of recruitment and selection, her appointment had amounted to an “upward movement" with greater responsibilities than she had had as programme head. Her appointment as head of KZN had been formally confirmed in writing and, even though positions had subsequently been restructured, she performed the duties of what was colloquially referred to as “regional head". Whether the regional head was a post or a “role" was irrelevant because the applicant had still been elevated in status. A demotion may occur even if the employee had not been formally promoted to a higher position. This approach was consistent with a wide interpretation of the definition of “unfair labour practice". Nothing suggested that the then head of the SIU was not authorised to appoint the applicant to a higher position. That decision had to stand until set aside by a competent court. The applicant had, accordingly, proved that she had been demoted, even though her salary had remained the same. The demotion had occurred without consultation. This was grossly unfair.

Turning to relief, the Commissioner declined to order the respondent to appoint her to the post of regional manager because that post had changed in the interim to require financial qualifications. The only alternative was to award compensation.

 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 418

The respondent was ordered to pay the applicant compensation equal to three months’ salary.

Regarding costs, the Commissioner noted that much time had been wasted by the argument that applicant had not been promoted. The respondent was ordered to pay the applicant her costs of two days of the arbitration at the prescribed rate.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration took place at the CCMA offices in Durban on 6 August, 24–25 October 2018 and 1–2 August and 15 October 2019. Both parties were legally represented, the applicant by Mr Purdon of Purdon Attorneys and the respondent by Adv Jikela, instructed by the State Attorney.

Issue to be decided
The applicant claimed that she was unfairly demoted on 6 October 2017. The respondent disputed that the applicant’s job description had ever changed ie that she was never promoted and hence that she could never have been demoted.
The issue to be decided was therefore whether the respondent committed an unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended.

Preliminary issues
None.
Both parties presented bundles of documents which were supplemented as the arbitration proceeded. By close of proceedings we had bundles numbered “A" to “G".

Background to the issue
The applicant was first employed by the Special Investigating Unit (“SIU") in 2002 but left to pursue other opportunities. She then returned in 2011 as a programme manager.
It was common cause that the SIU is a creature of statute established by the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act 74 of 1996.
It was the applicant’s case that Adv Vas Soni promoted her to “regional head of KZN" in October 2014 and that she was summarily and unilaterally demoted from that position on 6 October 2017.
Although the applicant was initially not given any additional remuneration as regional head, this was changed during the tenure of Adv Visagie and the applicant was awarded an allowance of approximately R13 085 per month for the additional responsibilities.
During or about 2017 the applicant lodged an internal grievance and the head of the unit (now Adv Mothibi) threatened her and told her to withdraw her claim. Shortly thereafter, the deputy head (Caroline Mampuru)  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 419
  arrived at the KZN office and removed the applicant from her role, replacing her with Jonathan Chetty. The applicant contended that this constituted a demotion and that it was unfair. She sought to return to her role as regional head of KZN and to be paid the allowance that accompanied that role.
The respondent disputed that the applicant was ever promoted to the post of regional head and hence contended she could never have been demoted. It was the respondent’s case that all Adv Soni asked the applicant to do was to focus on an existing KPA (“B60") ie to manage the region. Her position of programme manager did not change and there was no such post as regional head at the time. The respondent had restructured in 2010 and the post of regional head had been made redundant. As such, the applicant merely occupied a “role" and hence she was paid a responsibility allowance for her additional functions, and was not given a salary increase as one would expect in a promotion. Moreover, there had been no compliance with the respondent’s promotion policy or procedure in her appointment.
It was common cause that the applicant was unilaterally removed from her position but the respondent argued that the removal was merely a reallocation of resources and that her substantive position as programme manager never changed. There was thus no demotion. The removal had nothing to do with her grievance and was based on operational requirements.

Survey of evidence

Applicant’s case

Zodwa Xesibe – Buswana
The applicant was appointed as a programme manager but was acting regional head of Gauteng from 1 September 2012. At that time there were significant challenges in KZN, and the projects director and regional head (Dave Walker) asked her to go to KZN to assist. The applicant agreed and initially commuted between KZN and Gauteng. After a period, she found the travelling too onerous and asked to relocate to KZN.
The applicant moved to KZN as a programme manager on 1 April 2013, reporting to Dave Walker as her head and the acting projects director, Paul Modipe.
On 30 August 2013 Adv Soni was appointed as permanent head of the SIU and on 13 October 2014 he discussed with her the possibility of appointing her as regional head of KZN. By that time Walker was 60 years old and due to retire. Soni told her that he had the power to appoint any fit and proper person in terms of the SIU Act and alluded to the fact that he had done so in other appointments.
The applicant was reluctant to take over KZN as the office was volatile. On 16 October she wrote to Soni (“A2") expressing her concerns and he then visited her office on 30 October 2014. The discussion alleviated her concerns and Soni announced her appointment at the meeting that day. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 420
It was misleading for the respondent to say that she was just instructed to focus on one part of her KPAs ie management. She was appointed by the head of the unit in terms of his statutory powers and she functioned as a regional head. It was an actual position and not merely a “role" and Walker used to function in that position.
The communication from HR at “A9" was a clear indication that it was a promoted position and not just a refocus in her existing duties. In addition, her written confirmation from Soni on 21 February 2015 (“A10") left no doubt about her status.
The applicant was constantly liaising with HR about her new contract and increase for her new role and it was not resolved by the time Soni left. As a result, she wrote to the new Head, Visagie, in May 2015 requesting that the issue of her salary be addressed. She wanted to be graded E1 the same as the previous incumbent.
Visagie replied on 14 July 2015 and advised that she would receive a special allowance for her additional responsibilities (“A20"). The applicant was not satisfied as she was not acting in the post. She rejected the argument that the post did not exist because it did not appear on the organogram and explained that numerous positions in the SIU did not appear on the structure but there were nonetheless people in those positions. She cited as examples the CFO and SCM manager posts. The applicant also explained that management had made the decision to resuscitate the position in 2012 at the Mangaung conference.
The applicant replied to Visagie (“A1"), highlighting that she was not merely acting and that the special allowance did not address her concern. As a result of this disagreement, the applicant had declared a dispute and referred the matter to CCMA. Commissioner Lyster found that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to hear her claim (“B115").
A new head of the SIU, Adv Mothibi, was appointed on 5 May 2016. In a meeting on 13 May 2016 Mothibi questioned her about her CCMA referral and told her that she should have resolved her complaint internally. He also said that “he hoped that she would not regret her decision", which she interpreted as a threat.
The applicant was thereafter subjected to a stream of victimisation which led her to lodge a grievance against Mothibi. Mothibi chaired the grievance meeting himself and issued the outcome on 31 August 2017. She and her colleagues decided not to challenge the outcome and instead referred a claim to the Gender Commission.
Caroline Mampuru (“CM") was appointed on 1 September 2017 as the deputy head of the SIU. On 14 September 2017, the applicant complained to CM about the issues with her reporting structure (“A36") and on 28 September CM replied that the matter was in her hands and there was no need to discuss it further.
On 5 October the applicant was advised that CM would be visiting the KZN office the next day at 11am and wanted to meet with her. CM was accompanied by Jonathan Chetty, acting regional head of Gauteng. CM advised the applicant that she had come to KZN to remove her as  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 421
  regional head and install Chetty into the role. CM told her that she believed this would resolve the “problems" in KZN. She then asked the applicant to call the other managers and the applicant asked if she could be excused. The applicant was shocked and devastated and had to step out to compose herself. She did later join the meeting at which Chetty was introduced as the new regional head.
On the Monday she asked CM to reduce the removal to writing (“A45") but she only received a written response (“A46") on 25 October 2017, after which she referred a dispute.
The applicant referred to the minutes of the Mangaung conference in Bloemfontein (“C3") which she submitted proved that they discussed “powers of regional heads, independence of regional offices, regional heads cannot even resolve simple issues in the current structure". Whilst it was true that the post of regional head was not on the organogram, it existed as an operational fact and hence it was unclear what the formal mandate of a regional head was. Everyone came to realise that the role was required and at Manguang they discussed how they could revive regional heads in all regions (see “C6" and “C17"). The role was then revived and the applicant occupied that post until she was removed.
The applicant referred to the annual report presented by the SIU to the parliamentary committee (“C20") wherein Dave Walker was referred to as a regional head, as well as reference at page 124 to regional heads as part of the executive management. This document was dated 2013 and supported her version that the position of regional head still existed.
She referred also to the minute of the EXCO meeting on 13 June 2012 (D) and to “F11" wherein the comment was “as agreed the SIU governance structure will be reviewed . . . for now the old EXCO members will continue . . . as well as the regional heads who are now co-opted by the head of the unit". This too supported her version, as did “F14" wherein it was recorded that “Head of unit to formally co-opt regional heads. Recorded Done Aug 12". The applicant pointed out that she attended EXCO meetings in her capacity as regional head and that ordinary programme managers did not sit at EXCO.
The applicant reiterated that she was not merely acting in a “role" and regional head was in fact a position. She had a formal letter from the Head of the Unit confirming her appointment. Being summarily removed from her post was emotionally upsetting and humiliating. Her career had gone backwards and her colleagues feared associating with her. Not only had she lost the allowance but her status had been reduced and she now reported to Chetty, her junior. From 73 subordinates she now only had 20.
The applicant wanted to be reappointed as regional head and paid her allowance from 6 October 2017 to date.
On cross-examination the applicant agreed that she underwent a formal recruitment process when she returned to the SIU in 2011. She was appointed as a programme manager in Pretoria at head office and agreed that there was no programme manager positions in the regions at the time. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 422
The regional heads at the time were: Dave Walker (KZN), Mike Lisa (CT), Mncaba (EL), Stimele (Free State), Paul Modipa (Gauteng), Alex (Limpopo) and Prudence (Mpumalanga). They were managing regions although they were not programme managers because there was no position of regional manager. The regional manager was a post for smaller offices, whereas the regional head ran the big offices - Durban, Eastern Cape, Pretoria and Cape Town.
The terms “regional head" and “regional manager" were used interchangeably after 2010 but in reality they were two different roles. Although regional head did not appear on the structure, in reality people occupied those positions. Chetty for example was a project manager who was responsible for heading up the KZN region as a regional head.
It was her contention that regional head was a stand-alone position and not merely a function given to programme managers. The applicant agreed that she took over acting as head in Gauteng when Modipa was promoted but disagreed that her designation did not change. She was appointed acting regional manager of Gauteng. It was true that she was not referred to as a regional head. She received an acting allowance at the time.
In April 2012 at Mangaung the regional head position was “resuscitated". In essence the post had become redundant in form, not substance, in that people did continue to occupy the role of regional head. They therefore decided to reinstate the post and allow the de facto regional heads to “take up the role in full" and become part of EXCO. They agreed at the conference to implement what was already working and then to review issues with the structure across the board. It was not true that the only resolution reached at Manguang was to implement a process to review the structure. The applicant could not explain why Visagie claimed there was no such role as regional head when he had also been at Manguang.
Regional head appeared on the structure in the 2012-2013 annual report (“C26"). It was put to the applicant that in that organogram, programme manager was superior to regional head. The applicant disagreed.
In 2010 Dave Walker was a programme manager and the regional head (“B80"). The applicant agreed that Walker remained a programme manager after 2014 but submitted that he was always referred to as the regional head. Soni even confirmed in her letter that she had replaced him as regional head.
The applicant conceded that she was not at the SIU during the restructure of 2008–2010 and she could not dispute that all regional heads were consulted at the time about being made redundant. She however pointed out that the term regional head was continuously used thereafter and nobody ever disputed it.
The applicant was referred to her job description (“B60") and agreed that “manage and develop staff" was one of her KPAs, as was “management of regional offices". She disputed that the management function performed as a regional head was the same and insisted that it was far more extensive than that performed by a programme manager. The applicant  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 423
  disputed one programme manager was merely assigned to the management role (ie of regional head) in each office. She was not a programme manager doing extra duties but was the duly appointed regional head.
It was not true that Soni lacked the necessary locus standi to appoint her. As the head of the SIU, the SIU Act gave him power to appoint “any fit and proper person" and the applicant was not the only person appointed in that way.
After her CCMA case she had been victimised by the SIU and the projects director Leonard Lekhetlo, who told people not to report to her. The applicant denied that people did not want to report to her because of her lack of leadership skills.
The applicant was demoted in Chetty’s presence which she considered untoward. Proper steps should have been taken to demote her via an incapacity process. The applicant disagreed that a formal process was not required given that she was merely a programme manager doing extra duties.

Respondent’s case

Heila Dreyer
She is the senior manager: rewards and performance in the HR component of SIU. Dreyer verified the OD (“organisational design") process that was commenced in 2009 by Deloitte/KPMG (“B91"). The aim was to migrate current employees into the new structure with the minimum of disruption. Not every post was affected and for example forensic investigators were unaffected by the restructure, whereas those in business operations were affected (“B96–99"). In terms of the restructure the position of regional manager was identified as redundant.
A regional head and regional manager might be different but the term was used interchangeably in the SIU. In essence it was the person who headed up the regional office. There were four regional managers in the SIU at the time, one of whom was Dave Walker. During the restructure, the regional managers migrated to a programme manager or project manager role (“B102") and by 2011 there was no longer such a thing as a regional manager in the SIU.
The applicant re-joined the SIU (“B17") as a programme manager on the new OD. Programme manager is a senior role and the incumbent was tasked with running projects, generating business and managing people. Some PMs worked at head office on national projects, whereas others were in the provinces and supervised regional staff. Their day-to-day functions might differ, but they were all programme managers.
Walker was the PM in KZN and he performed management of the regional office as part of his job description as programme manager (see “KPA6" on “B63"). That did not render him a regional head/manager, and it was clear from the organogram at B70 that there was no such position in the SIU. Some PMs were in national office, some were regional and some focused more on certain KPAs than others, however, they were all effectively programme managers. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 424
The applicant and Walker were both programme managers and the only reason Walker was on E1 grade was because those who migrated from the old structure did not have their remuneration altered, although their job profile and status changed (“B80"). The applicant was not entitled to a grade change when she “took over" from Walker as the PM managing the KZN region. Walker’s grade attached to him as a person and not to the post he occupied.
Dreyer attended the Mangaung conference (“C1") and confirmed that amongst the issues discussed were the staff unhappiness and the reluctance of SIU employees to embrace the new structure. People did also question the powers of the programme managers who were in the regions and they were colloquially referred to as regional heads although there was no such post in existence. There was no firm decision to revive the role and it was merely agreed (“C6") that the power and mandate of “regional head" would be put on the next MANCO agenda. The SIU would not create a position in this manner and it would have to conduct a full OD and recruitment process to “recreate" the post of regional manager.
Dreyer wrote the memorandum at “A19" and Visagie also advised the applicant that she was not entitled to a grade change when she became “regional head". She was merely performing an additional function and hence she received an acting allowance. The applicant alleged inconsistency in relation to Gumede who was in business support (HR). Gumede was given an increase because he came into the organisation in a new position and was earning lower than his previous post. Visagie authorised an interim pay scale pending the roll out of a new OD.
The SIU commenced with another restructuring exercised in 2018 but it was only implemented this year. It created the new position of Provincial Head which was similar to the old regional manager.
On cross-examination Dreyer explained that the first OD created the PM role and did away with regional manager, and the new OD had created provincial heads. The job profiles were totally different. The new provincial manager was head of a business unit and dealt with budgets etc, which was not something the regional manager had done. This shift in the role was to focus on generating revenue for the SIU.
Dreyer denied that the applicant was demoted as she was kept on the same salary level. Her acting allowance was merely stopped.
There was nothing dishonest about the SIU denying the applicant’s promotion in the face of Soni’s letter. She was adamant that there was no higher position to which the applicant had been appointed. She could not dispute that the applicant moved into Walker’s office but disputed that she managed 70 people in the KZN region. She disputed that the applicant suffered a loss of status when she had to vacate the office to make way for Chetty.
The Head of SIU had statutory powers per the enacting legislation. He did have the power to appoint people. It was true that the decision of Soni to appoint the applicant had not been set aside by any court or competent tribunal. Dreyer disputed however that it was the norm for any SIU  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 425
  appointment to take place without a proper recruitment and selection process. She conceded that it was not unlawful for a head to make appointments in terms of the SIU Act but took issue with Soni placing the applicant into a post that did not exist on the structure. The post of regional head was still really just a PM with special duties.
Dreyer was not aware whether Soni had sight of the OD when he took office, but she assumed he would have read it or been told about it during his handover. She could not dispute that Gumede, head of HR, was referenced on “A10" ie Soni’s letter appointing the applicant.
Dreyer was directed to an email from HR (“A9") advising that the applicant was appointed as “regional head". She could not comment on the document as she was not the author but noted that the term “regional head" was just a colloquial term and did not denote the reality of the SIU structure. Directed to “C26", the 2012/2013 SIU report to Parliament, Dreyer had to concede that the organogram therein contained reference to “regional head" but reiterated her view that the PMs named on that document were merely persons performing an additional management function. There was no regional manager or regional head after the new OD in 2009.
Dreyer conceded that the organogram relied on by the respondent omitted the position of chief financial officer, although such a post did exist. The Head could create positions as needed and a resolution would be passed for that.

Gerhard Wilhelm Visagie
He is currently the Senior Manager: Civil Litigation but was formerly the SIU corporate legal counsel and acted as Head of the unit from 1 March 2015 to 1 May 2016.
Before the OD in 2009 the SIU operated primarily through a head office in Pretoria and regional offices. The restructure aimed to enhance SIU’s national presence and one means of achieving this was doing away with the post of regional head/regional manager. The persons in those posts were accommodated in the alternative positions of programme managers but retained their salaries. The restructure commenced in 2009 but was only completed around 2011.
Two KPA’s had been added to the programme manager function which would enable someone in the region to take on some of the functions previously performed by a regional manager. Those additional functions, however, did not apply to every PM. KPAs 5 and 6 were the additional duties performed and there was a level of prestige associated with that person. They “loosely referred" to that person as regional head but it was a role and not a position. That person would attend meetings and get a bigger office, but derived no other financial benefits.
The reference to regional heads in the Mangaung conference report (“C3", “C6" and “C7") in no way meant that the old structure continued. At Mangaung they discussed the difficulties experienced in implementing the new OD but there was no decision to do away with the structure. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 426
“B69" was the official organisation structure and it remained in place until the new one in 2019. “Roles" were added as time went by but no “position" existed on the structure until the restructuring process was finalised. This also applied to the CFO appointed by Soni.
The regional head as per the organogram (“C26") was below a programme manager which denoted that it was merely one type of PM and not a position on its own.
Soni was empowered in terms of section 3(2) to appoint people but he had to exercise that power within the parameters of the SIU policies on recruitment and selection. A person cannot be appointed in a position that does not exist. At best for the applicant, Soni appointed her to a role and not a position.
The applicant took over from Walker who was a PM with additional responsibilities. Visagie agreed that Walker had a degree of recognition and prestige in the role and hence when the applicant took over, she was congratulated. But it was not a substantive post and she was merely taking on the two additional KPAs in the job profile of a programme manager.
The applicant had asked him for a salary adjustment (“A16") and he explained that he could not grant her request as she was in a role and not a position. He did, however, authorise payment of a special allowance in recognition of the fact that KZN was a particularly difficult office. Visagie also took into account that Walker earned more than her at the time that he stepped down. He had not treated the applicant unfairly in this regard.
On cross-examination Visagie had no comment on whether Soni told the applicant that he was making her appointment in terms of section 3(2) but said he understood she took over Walker’s role. It was put to him that Soni’s decision (to appoint the applicant) was an administrative act and could not be disavowed unless set aside by court. Visagie disagreed and said that management must be able to assign its staff roles and responsibilities. Appointments could be made outside of the organogram but subject to the policy. The CFO was headhunted but the Head of the SIU did not have an unfettered discretion to appoint whomever he wished. Visagie was not sure of the details but assumed the CFO was a role at the time as there was no such position on the structure.
There was no need for a formal procedure to be followed when one removed someone from a role. Managerial prerogative allowed the SIU to remove the applicant without a procedure.
The applicant was not demoted on 6 October 2017. The allowance was removed when she was taken out of the role because it was attached to the role.

Caroline Mampuru (“CM")
She is the Deputy Head of the SIU.
The applicant’s grievance was still alive when she joined but CM only read it in detail when she was doing the CGE (“Commission on Gender Equality") submission. She was, however, aware of the grievance and the  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 427
  fact that the applicant and Lekgetho did not have a good working relationship.
Lekgetho as the Projects Director supervised operations across the country. The applicant was responsible for KZN and had a lot of contact with him in terms of the programmes, administrative issues and operational work. The applicant also had issues with Mafisa, a junior staff member who was not well disciplined and had raised that and other issues with Mampuru and the PD when she was in KZN. CM thereafter asked Nyathi to go to KZN to see if she and the applicant could informally resolve some of the issues, with a particular focus on her strained relationship with Lekgetho. CM had witnessed the applicant’s hostile attitude towards Lekgetho at their meeting and did not want it to escalate. Nyathi was meant to then report back to her. It was for this reason that she told the applicant that there was no need for further communication as she was busy dealing with the matter (“A41").
CM had not seen the letter at “A10" before she met with the applicant. She knew of the applicant as an acting regional head. The structure was under review at the time and there was no such position as regional head. All of those who were at the regions were “playing a role of being supervisors or running the province". It was a “caretaker role" and they had not been formally appointed.
On 6 October she met the applicant at the KZN office in Hillcrest. CM was with Jonathan Chetty and the plan was to reorganise the office and put someone into the role of caretaker regional head. On arrival she met with Mafisa to address her ill-discipline and she then spoke to the applicant. She told her that Chetty would take over as caretaker regional head. Her meeting with the applicant was not really a discussion and she just informed her that she was there to put Chetty in place and to then work out a smooth handover.
CM needed a new lead in the province to create stability in the region. It was a drastic move but she wanted to ensure that the three of them had a smooth transition, ie CM, Chetty and the applicant.
Once she had spoken to the applicant, she met all of the managers and the union, and informed them about the changes. The applicant joined them later. It was not true that she met the managers before she met the applicant.
The applicant wrote to her on 9 October requesting written confirmation of her demotion. CM spoke to the Head (Mothibi) a few days after the email because she was confused by the use of the term “demotion". She asked Mothibi why the applicant would say that when the regional head was not on the structure and was just an acting role. Mothibi mentioned that there was an issue around whether she was appointed or promoted. He also said something about her being the only programme manager who got an allowance for leading the province. CM formed the opinion that she could not have been demoted as she was not selected or promoted to the position of regional head of KZN.
CM duly sent the applicant a formal letter explaining her reasons for changing the management set up in KZN (“A46–48"). In short, her reason  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 428
  was operational efficiency. She had to expedite the long-outstanding matters, cut turn-around times, and harmonise relations in the office. KZN was a divided office with morale issues and low productivity. It was fair to characterise the office as volatile and it was clear to CM that the applicant was not in control of staff-related issues in the province. She also wanted to ensure consistency throughout the province and it troubled her that the applicant was the only PM who received an additional allowance.
CM disputed that the applicant was treated unfairly in this incident. Removing her and taking away the allowance was not unfair. She was not the only person removed from a project and CM introduced a new culture where they moved people to where they were needed and where they worked to their strengths. She moved regional heads in Bloemfontein, EC, Mpumalanga and North West. In each case it was done via a conversation with the affected party and nobody else had challenged their reassignment or removal.
The decision was not personal and she had no reason to mistreat the applicant or anyone else. Her decision had been proved correct as KZN was far more stable and staff morale had improved.
On cross-examination CM agreed that an employee could not be demoted without a fair procedure. CM had not followed a procedure to remove the applicant because there was no demotion. She was just rotating regional staff and managers across the country. If one construed the applicant’s removal as a demotion, it would have to follow that the procedure was unfair.
CM had no knowledge of how the applicant was appointed but it was her understanding that there were no regional heads on the structure, and that all of them were just in a role. There was no need for her to ask the applicant how she was appointed as CM had been briefed by Nyathi in HR. She used that understanding of the organisational structure to inform her decisions. Even after the applicant claimed that she had been demoted, CM re-checked her facts with Nyathi and Lekgetho and she remained of the view that there was only ever an acting /caretaker position of regional head.
CM agreed that the SIU was a creature of statute. The SIU Head could make any permanent appointment in line with their policies. CM accepted that section 3 of the SIU Act allowed the head of the unit to make appointments but said he had to follow a process. She was not aware of any legal authority that only the court could set aside an appointment made by the head of SIU.
CM disagreed that the position of regional head persisted after the new structure and insisted that it was a role and not a post. She conceded that nothing in Soni’s letter at “A10" referred to an acting role and admitted that it referred to an appointment.
It was true that she unilaterally removed the applicant on 6 October. CM disagreed that she had to consult with the applicant first and stated that if someone is acting in a role they are not entitled to that post/role. That responsibility can be changed at any time as long as it does not change their substantive post. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 429
It was put to her that the applicant had 70 people reporting to her as regional head and received R13 000 per month more, which was a clear elevation of her status. CM conceded that “perhaps acting did come with some kind of prestige" but disputed that she was ever promoted. She agreed that the applicant had to move out of her office and lost her allowance but said she had no idea whether that constituted a loss of status.
She had not humiliated the applicant but admitted there was no forewarning before she got to the meeting in KZN. It was true that she arrived with Chetty, the applicant’s replacement, and that he was present during their meeting. Chetty knew that he was coming as her replacement before the applicant knew. The applicant was upset and did walk away to compose herself.
The applicant’s removal had nothing to do with her grievance against Mothibi and it was not his idea to remove her in retaliation. CM made the decision based on the numerous complaints about KZN and the backlog of cases. Mothibi left operational matters to her, although she had consulted him about her decision.

Summary of argument
The parties agreed to file heads of argument on or before 22 October 2019 and both submissions were filed timeously. As the applicant had made a request for costs which was not canvassed when the arbitration closed, the respondent was offered an opportunity (via the senior CMO) to respond thereto by Friday 25 October 2019. The respondent availed itself of the opportunity and Adv Jikela’s submissions on costs have been considered.
The documents form part of the record and I have therefore summarised the content only very briefly herein.

Applicant
Mr Purdon argued that it was factually incorrect and actually dishonest for the respondent to claim that the applicant was appointed to a role and not a position. He referred in this regard to Soni’s letter (“A10") as well as the letter from HR confirming same (“A9"), and noted that the applicant’s evidence in relation to her appointment was uncontested. The respondent had attempted to cast doubt on Soni’s authority but the Labour Court had pronounced on this in Muller v SIU (“A49") and, as his decision had not been set aside, it bound the SIU. In the premises there could be no doubt that the applicant was appointed as regional head and that it constituted a promotion for her.
He rejected the respondent’s reliance on Lyster’s ruling in the previous matter and submitted that the cause of action was totally different. That case related to a salary increment the applicant sought.
Mr Purdon rejected also the respondent’s version that there was no such position as regional head as same had been made redundant in a restructuring exercise. He submitted that the evidence proved that in fact the post still existed on the ground and this was clear from references to regional heads in Mangaung, in the parliamentary report and even from the  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 430
  witnesses. Dreyer had conceded that the PMs running the regions were “colloquially referred to as regional heads".
In relation to the demotion, it was immaterial whether the applicant was demoted from a “role" or a “position" and the undisputed facts were that she lost status, lost her office, lost her allowance, had fewer subordinates and no longer sat on EXCO after her removal. The fact that her rank remained at the level of programme manager did not change the fact that she was demoted.
The demotion was effected in a high-handed manner by Mampuru, with no consultation whatsoever. It was thus wholly unfair and the applicant should be reinstated to the position of regional head with back pay of her allowance to 6 October 2017.
Mr Purdon requested also that the respondent be ordered to pay costs given its dishonest and vexatious defence of the case.

Respondent
Adv Jikela disputed that the applicant was ever appointed as regional head because the post did not exist; denied that the role carried any prestige, status or financial benefit; and disputed that the applicant was ever demoted.
She submitted that it was common cause or undisputed that Dave Walker was the regional head but that he became a programme manager when the restructure rendered the regional head post redundant. Per paragraph 15 she states that Walker was a programme manager “performing the role of regional head".
Soni, it was submitted, “got it wrong" when he appointed the applicant to the position of regional head and the appointment was invalid. It was for this reason that it was never necessary for the respondent to approach the court to set the applicant’s appointment aside, and, in any event, it was the applicant who bore the onus of proving her appointment was valid.
Relying on Minister of Justice and another v Bosch NO and others, Adv Jikela argued that the applicant retained her rank and was just allocated “slightly different work" and hence was not demoted. It was a temporary placement and she was not entitled by right or law to the rank, status or benefit.
It was CM’s unchallenged evidence that she had reallocated numerous other programme managers in the same manner and none of them had viewed their reallocation as a demotion.
Adv Jikela urged me to find that the applicant was not a credible witness, asked me to draw an adverse inference against her because of her failure to call any witnesses and submitted that I ought to apply the cautionary rule as she was in essence a single witness.
In relation to relief she argued that the applicant could not be appointed as regional head or paid the allowance that she received and that to grant her any compensation would set a negative precedent. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 431
Insofar as costs were concerned, Adv Jikela argued that there was no basis for a costs order as the respondent had conducted itself honestly throughout and had a bona fide defence to the claim. One also had to bear in mind that the parties have an ongoing employment relationship.

Analysis of submissions and law
Section 186(2) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended, provides as follows:
“(2) Unfair labour practice means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –
(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
(b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
(c) the failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
(d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 200 (Act 26 of 2000) on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."
The applicant’s dispute was lodged in terms of section 186(2)(a) and it was her case that she was unfairly demoted on 6 October 2017 when she was removed from her position as regional head of the KZN SIU office.
The fact of the applicant’s removal was common cause, as was the manner in which the removal was effected. The issue in dispute and to be determined is whether the applicant was ever promoted to the post of regional head and, if so, whether she could then have been demoted.

Was the applicant promoted?
It is common cause herein that the applicant was not promoted in the sense that she applied for a vacant post and underwent a recruitment and selection process.
Promotion is defined in the Concise Oxford English Dictionary (12ed) 2011 as “the action of raising someone to a higher position or rank". Other definitions refer to promotion as “upward movement in the present job leading to greater responsibilities, higher status and better salary" or “the transfer of an employee to a job that pays more money or one that carries some preferred status" or even “where an employee advances or progresses to a higher position in the organisation".
Grogan in “Dismissal, Discrimination and Unfair Labour Practices" describes a promotion as being elevated to a higher position, or an increase in responsibility and status.
In Mashegoane and another v The University of The North [1998] 1 BLLR 73 (LC) the court affirmed the meaning of promotion as “advance, raise to a higher rank or position, advancement in position or preferment".  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 432

  It also held that an employee elevated from lecturer to Dean was promoted because of the additional powers and authority attached to the latter position.

The crisp issue is whether the applicant’s move to regional head, despite maintaining her grade and level of programme manager, was an “upward movement" for her. I believe it is clear from the evidence that it was.
The applicant took on more responsibility; oversaw the entire KZN office instead of just her own team; had a bigger office; and increased status. She also (albeit later) received a financial benefit.
The next issue to be considered is whether the applicant was formally appointed/promoted to the regional head post or whether she was merely “acting in a caretaker role" and performing additional responsibilities in terms of her existing job description as claimed by the respondent.
In support of her version that she was properly appointed the applicant produced a letter from Adv Soni, the then Head of the SIU, the content of which was never placed in dispute. The relevant portions of the letter read as follows:

“FORMAL CONFIRMATION OF YOUR APPOINTMENT AS KZN REGIONAL HEAD

. . . The purpose of this letter is to confirm formally and in writing the announcement I made when I was at the Durban office on 30 October 2014 . . . that you were the new Head of the Unit… and that you were replacing Mr Dave Walker as the Head . . . let me again congratulate you on being appointed to this important position . . ."

The applicant also produced an email sent by HR confirming her appointment, the relevant portions of which read:

“We are pleased to announce that Ms Zodwa Xesibe was appointment (sic) as Regional Head (KZN Region) on the 30th October 2014 . . ."

It was the applicant’s case that she and Soni had a lengthy discussion about her taking over from Dave Walker, who was due to retire; that she initially expressed reluctance to take over the “volatile" KZN office; but that Soni persuaded her to take on the role. This evidence was not disputed, and nor was the applicant’s testimony that Soni came to the KZN office in October 2014 to make the necessary announcement to all of the staff. It was not in dispute that the applicant, from that point on, assumed the “position/role" of regional head of KZN, performing additional functions and assuming responsibilities not previously part of her portfolio as an ordinary programme manager.
It was the respondent’s case that, as of 2012, the position of regional head ceased to exist on the official structure and that Dave Walker was merely a programme manager with additional responsibilities. As such, the applicant was not “promoted" when she took over from him but merely performed those additional functions in her existing position of programme manager. It was further the respondent’s case that Adv Soni did not have the power to make an appointment without complying with the SIU policy on recruitment and selection. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 433
In terms of the former argument, it is common cause, alternatively undisputed, that the SIU was restructured in 2010, although the changes were only finally implemented in 2012. It would appear that prior to 2012 there was a formal position on the structure of Regional Manager, which position was occupied by Dave Walker in KZN. Per “B98", that position was made redundant and I accept that the position was no longer formally on the organogram.
Be that as it may, it would seem that the de facto position was that Walker, even on the respondent’s version, continued to run the KZN office. His formal job title was Programme Manager but he was “colloquially" referred to as the “regional head". The applicant testified that this term was used regularly during meetings and in engagements and her testimony in that regard was not successfully contradicted. In fact, the position of “regional head" even appears on the SIU annual report to parliament and in the HR email at “A9" and the respondent’s witnesses also conceded that the term was used in the workplace.
I am therefore satisfied that notwithstanding that the Regional Manager position no longer existed as of 2012, there was in the larger regions a programme manager who performed additional KPAs and was colloquially referred to as the “regional head".
The respondent’s argument that the regional head was a “role" and not a “post" is contrived and, with respect, nothing more than semantics. If one analyses substance over form (as is the norm in labour law), it is clear that the position of programme manager/regional head is an elevated position. He/she does not perform the same functions as other programme managers in that he/she has two additional KPAs (called KPA 5 and 6 by the respondent’s witnesses) and focuses more on overall management. In addition, Visagie admitted that it is a “role" which comes with a degree of prestige and privilege. The incumbent gets a bigger office and is permitted to sit on EXCO and in the applicant’s case, the role also came with a sizeable allowance.
I am of the view that whether the regional head position was a post or a role was, in fact, immaterial. Even if the post was not on the formal structure, the fact remains that it was an operational reality and that being appointed into the “role" constituted an elevation of status (albeit not rank) for the applicant. Even the respondent’s witnesses conceded that the programme manager who was tasked with running the region was, in Visagie’s words, “loosely" referred to as the “regional head" (or “colloquially" referred to as the regional head according to Dreyer), and performed additional responsibilities not performed by other programme managers. Visagie conceded that those PMs enjoyed a level of prestige not associated with ordinary programme managers. Their status must thus be said to be elevated, regardless of whether they hold a formal post or are in a role.
Grogan in Workplace Law (9ed) Juta at page 265 in discussing demotion states that “. . . a demotion may occur even if the employee has not been formally appointed to the higher position" and there is no reason that the same cannot apply to a promotion ie that an “upward movement" into a “role" could still fall within the ambit of a promotion for the purposes of  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 434
  the LRA. This approach would also, in my view, be consistent with the broader interpretation afforded to unfair labour practices since Apollo Tyres SA (Pty) Ltd v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation & Arbitration and others (2013) 34 ILJ 1120 (LAC) [also reported at [2013] 5 BLLR 434 (LAC) – Ed].
Insofar as the respondent’s argument about Adv Soni is concerned, it was common cause that section 3(2) of the SIU Act 74 of 1996 confers on the Head of the Unit the power to make appointments. The section provides that he “may from time to time appoint as many other fit and proper persons to the SIU as in his/her opinion are necessary for the effective functioning thereof". This power is very broadly worded but presumably would be fettered by requirements of legality and rationality that apply in administrative law.
There is nothing before me to suggest that Adv Soni did not make a considered, legal and rational decision to appoint the applicant when Dave Walker reached retirement age but, in any event, I have no jurisdiction to pronounce on his decision.
The seminal case in this regard is Oudekraal Estates (Pty) Ltd v City of Cape Town and others 2004 (6) SA 222 (SCA) [also reported at [2004] JOL 12742 (SCA) – Ed] and the dicta of the court was repeated in the Muller v SIU and others matter referred to by Mr Purdon and appearing at “A49". Gush J in that matter confirmed the legal position that an administrative decision (such as that taken by the Head of the SIU) stands unless and until it is set aside by the court, even in circumstances where the decision is unlawful.
In casu it was common cause that the respondent made no such application.
Adv Jikela argued that the respondent had no duty to approach the court to set aside Soni’s decision as it was inherently invalid and unlawful but that is simply incorrect and not in accordance with the decision in Oudekraal.
In the premises, Adv Soni’s decision to appoint the applicant to the position of regional head stands and it is not my place to question whether he acted lawfully or whether he was bound to apply the SIU promotion policy. I therefore do not intend to traverse the evidence led in this regard.
Having accepted that the appointment indeed occurred, it is my finding that the appointment also constituted a promotion for the applicant. The role of regional head came with an elevation in status and increase in responsibility and even Visagie conceded that the “role" came with a degree of cache and importance.
The applicant has thus discharged the onus of proving that she was promoted.
I make this finding notwithstanding the fact that in order to succeed in her claim herein, it was never necessary for the applicant to prove that she was promoted in order to prove that she was demoted. I have traversed this argument only because it was a significant part of the respondent’s  
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 435
  case. The fact is that question before me is not whether the applicant was lawfully or correctly made regional head in 2014 or whether that action constituted a promotion; but whether, when she was removed from that role on 6 October 2017, it constituted a demotion.

Was the applicant demoted?
There are numerous cases dealing with demotion and what constitutes a demotion but I shall have regard to Solidarity on behalf of Kern v Mudau and others [2007] 6 BLLR 566 (LC). Kern was a senior personnel officer who, after the incorporation of the Standerton Municipality into the Lekwa Municipality, was assigned to the post of committee officer but required also to perform his old duties which included HR functions. His remuneration remained unchanged but the committee officer post was inferior in status and entailed less responsibility. Kern referred an unfair demotion dispute to the CCMA and the CCMA commissioner found that there was no demotion because his salary and benefits remained the same. On review, the Labour Court found that a demotion occurred and awarded compensation equal to the difference between the salary that Kern would have earned over a twelve month period had he been placed in the HR manager post and the amount he would have earned on his existing salary over the same period.
In so doing the court held:
“[37]  . . . the arbitrator had he applied his mind to the evidential material before him should have found that the status of the post senior personnel officer was higher than that of the post committee officer.
[38] It logically follows that at least in status JF Kern was demoted and consequently was subjected to an unfair labour practice within the meaning of s 186 (2)(a) of the Act."
The court went on to quote with approval the following passage from Du Toit et al Labour Relations Law (4th Ed at 465), which comes from Ndlela v SA Stevedores Ltd (1999) 13 ILJ 663 (IC):

“. . . in law, demotion could also mean a reduction or diminution of dignity, importance, responsibility, power or status even if salary, attendant benefits and rank are retained."

I believe that it is now trite that a demotion can occur even when an employee’s salary and/or grade (rank) are unchanged.
There is little doubt in applying this definition to the applicant’s case that she was demoted, even though she remained a programme manager on the official structure.
The applicant was unilaterally removed from her elevated position or “special responsibility" role of regional head, a position she had held for almost 3 years, and made an ordinary programme manager. In the course of this, her responsibility was reduced from overseeing about 70 employees to 20, she no longer performed the two additional KPAs, she did not sit on EXCO, she had to vacate her office and she lost her allowance. In addition, she lost the prestige that attached to being the regional head. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 436
This demotion occurred with no notice, no consultation and no opportunity for the applicant to address the reasons for demoting her. It must thus be considered to be grossly procedurally unfair.
Whilst it may well be that CM had good reasons for her decision and a valid basis for demoting the applicant, those reasons were never tested at the time nor was it put to the applicant during this arbitration that she was demoted because she did not have the KZN office “under control". I can therefore place little or no reliance on CM’s evidence of her poor performance and must thus find that there was no substantive reason for the demotion either.
In the premises, I am satisfied that the applicant has succeeded in showing that her demotion was unfair.

Relief
The applicant requested that she be reinstated to the post of regional head and back paid her allowance from October 2014 to date.
I have some difficulty with this because, since her dispute was referred, the respondent has restructured again. It has created the new position of Provincial Manager but there was no evidence before me as to the job description for that post, or what the duties and responsibilities were or even what qualifications were expected of the incumbent. The only evidence in this regard came (uncontested) from Dreyer to the effect that the position now entailed significant financial management requirements.
In view of this I cannot simply put the applicant into that position as she has requested. I also cannot return her to the role of regional manager/head when it is clear that post now does not exist.
The only reasonable alternative is to award her compensation.
Compensation in terms of the LRA should be just and fair, and should address the financial loss suffered by the applicant as well as the impact this unilateral demotion may have had on her career.
The applicant provided her payslip at “A23" and it reflects a salary of R76 950,81 per month. I am of the view, given the unfairness set out above, that compensation equal to three (3) months’ salary would adequately address the unfairness suffered by the applicant.

Costs
The final issue to be considered is Mr Purdon’s request that I censure the respondent with a costs order in view of its “dishonest and vexatious" defence of the case.
CCMA rule 39 allows me, when both parties are legally represented, to make a costs order bearing in mind the principles of law and fairness and having regard to the measure of success achieved; considerations of fairness; with prejudice offers made to settle the matter; whether any party or representative acted in a manner that was frivolous or vexatious; whether the parties are in an employment relationship; the effect of a costs order and the importance of the issues raised at the arbitration. 
[2020] 4 BALR 417 (CCMA) at 437
In this matter, the applicant has been wholly successful in her claim and, although I accept that the respondent, its witnesses and its representative were bona fides in their defence, there can be little doubt that the arbitration process was made more complex and lengthy by virtue of the respondent’s stance that the applicant was never promoted, this despite the respondent having sight of Adv Soni’s letter appointing her to the post of regional head. I am of the view that, however well-intentioned the respondent was, and despite its witnesses making the necessary concessions regarding the demotion, its stance on the promotion caused proceedings to be unduly protracted and put the applicant (and the CCMA) to additional cost.
Balanced against this, I am mindful of the fact that the parties are in an ongoing employment relationship and that costs orders are not readily granted in employment matters. However, taking into account the interest of both parties and the comments above, I am of the view that the applicant should be entitled to a limited costs order and I hereby order the respondent to pay her costs for two days of arbitration. These two days I estimate to be the time spent arguing the unnecessary aspect of the alleged promotion.
These costs are to be calculated per rule 39(4)(b) at R4 700 per day.

Award
The respondent, the Special Investigating Unit, unfairly demoted the applicant, Zodwa Xesibe.
The respondent is ordered to compensate the applicant for the aforementioned unfair demotion in the sum of R230 852,43 (Two Hundred and Thirty Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty Two Rand and Forty Three Cents) which amount is due and payable within 14 days of receipt of this award.
The respondent is also ordered to pay the applicant’s costs in the sum of R9 400 (Nine Thousand Four Hundred Rand).

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document