



Motsoeneng / SABC SOC Ltd [2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAJB14369-17
Date: 18/09/2018
Before: T Moodley, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(A)(I) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Bringing employer into disrepute — Suspended senior employee making public pronouncements at media conference describing employer’s board as lazy and corrupt and making false allegations about Labour Court judge — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


While on suspension after his purported appointment as Group Executive Corporate Affairs was set aside by the High Court, which had also set aside a finding by a disciplinary tribunal that had acquitted him on disciplinary charges based on the Public Protector’s Report and ordered that disciplinary proceedings be commenced afresh, the applicant called a media conference in which he made several derogatory remarks about the respondent’s board, a parliamentary committee which had been investigating the affairs of the SABC and a judge of the Labour Court. The applicant was charged with bringing the SABC into disrepute and breaching the relationship of trust. The applicant claimed that he was responding to unjustified comments because he had been refused permission to confront his accusers during the proceedings into the ad hoc parliamentary committee. The media conference, organised by a group called “Friends of Hlaudi”, was intended to give him an opportunity to respond to allegations that had been made about him. The applicant claimed further that he had been authorised to attend the conference by the acting General Chief Executive Officer and that he was exercising his right to freedom of speech and had made protected disclosures.

The Commissioner noted that at the time of the media conference, the applicant was in a tenuous position. A new interim board had been appointed. The SABC’s media policy provided that any employee who brought the corporation into disrepute by media statements would face disciplinary action. The reasons the applicant had given for attending the media conference were improbable. The GCEO had supported the decision to take disciplinary action against him for what he had said. The applicant’s further claim that he had attended the conference as a “private citizen” was irrelevant because he had discussed his role as an employee. Furthermore, the applicant’s remarks went much further than a response to the ad hoc committee. He had personally insulted a judge as well as a member of the interim board. His comments had also painted the members of the interim board generally as lazy and corrupt. He had also attributed corrupt motives to the parliamentary committee. These offensive statements did not enjoy legal protection because they had offended the dignity of  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1326
others, many were patently false and they had brought his employer into disrepute. The Commissioner found dismissal appropriate for the applicant’s misconduct, which had destroyed the relationship of trust. The applicant’s personal interests and motives were in direct conflict with those of his former employer.

Turning to procedure, the Commissioner rejected the applicant’s contention that he occupied a “sui generic” position which precluded the SABC from disciplining him in terms of its disciplinary code, which he said applied to “ordinary” employees.

The applicant’s dismissal was upheld.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing and representation
The hearing was held during the period, 13–15 March 2018; 2, 3, 4 and 7 May 2018; 11–15 June 2018 and 16 August 2018 at the CCMA National Office in Johannesburg. The applicant was represented by Advocates T Masuku SC and MK Mathipa instructed by Ms T Makuta of the firm Majavu Incorporated. The respondent was represented by Advocates A Myburgh SC, R Itzkin and T Ngukaitobi instructed by Mr S July of the firm Werksmans Attorneys. The hearing was mechanically recorded.

Issue to be determined
The issue to be determined is whether the dismissal of the applicant by the respondent is procedurally and substantively fair and the appropriate relief in the event that the dismissal is found to be unfair. The applicant seeks retrospective reinstatement without loss of benefits as relief, alternatively maximum compensation of 12 months in the event that the dismissal is found to be unfair only in relation to procedure.

Background
The applicant is George Hlaudi Motsoeneng, having been employed by respondent in various positions over a period of time until his dismissal.
The respondent is the South African Broadcasting Corporation SOC Limited, the South African national public broadcaster, having been established in terms of the Broadcasting Act 4 of 1999.

The charges
The applicant was presented with a written notice to attend a disciplinary hearing scheduled for 5 May 2017, whereby he was offered the opportunity to make representations concerning the following allegations of misconduct:
“1. Breach of Relation of Trust and Confidence
2.1 On 19 April 2017, whilst you attended and addressed a press conference. You should not have attended or addressed the press conference, either in your private or official capacity, for as long 

as your employment contract with the SABC subsists. In terms of the Cape High Court Order dated 12 December 2016, you remain on suspension. As a suspended employee, you may not address any press conference.

2.2 Your attendance and address of the press conference is a material breach of one or more of the following provisions:
Clauses 9.3 and 9.4 of your contract of employment -

  ‘The Executive shall . . .

use his utmost endeavours to protect and promote the Business and interests of the SABC and to preserve its reputation and goodwill;
be true and faithful to the SABC in all dealings and transactions whatsoever relating to the Business and interests of the SABC . . .’
Clauses 20.1.2.5 and 20.1.2.6 of your contract of employment, which provide for the dismissal of Executives –
causes the SABC to lose confidence and/or trust in the Group Executive;
brings himself and/or the SABC into serious disrepute . . .’
Clause 1.2.3 of Part 2 of the SABC Disciplinary Code and Procedures, which provides for the dismissal in the event of an employee ‘deliberately caused negative reporting of the SABC in the Media’.
The following provision of the SABC Media Policy –

  ‘Any member whose conduct brings the SABC into disrepute in interactions with the media in his public and private capacity will face disciplinary action in accordance with SABC policies.’

3. Bringing the SABC into disrepute
3.1 During your press conference, although you stated that you were not representing the SABC, the address was about information pertaining to the affairs of the SABC. In the process, you made statements which brought the SABC into disrepute, which is a breach of one or more of the provisions set out in paragraphs 2.1.1 to 2.1.4.
The offending statements are as follows –
‘Because all these Board members go there and serve their own interests. But the worst part is you know why there is a crisis at the SABC? Most of them they don’t work. When they don’t work, they are also checking the chocolate cake. Why do you take people who are unemployed and put them as Board members? Why can’t you put people who are committed, who run their own business, who have time to make sure the SABC runs professionally and the profit is there.’
‘Let me tell you about KRISH NAIDOO. Let me tell you about KRISH NAIDOO. You see,  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1328

  when you are a sell out, you will be a sell-out forever. He’s going to sell out these other Board members again.’

‘But this KRISH NAIDOO goes to Parliament and lies under oath; lies under oath.’
‘So KRISH NAIDOO should not be part of that Board.’
‘Remember, the ad hoc Committee said all those who lied under oath should be investigated. Now where is that process of investigating people who lie under oath, when a liar is on the Board? You can see it was a political agenda.’ [our emphasis] [sic].
The ad hoc Committee caused more problems than anyone, because if you do business with the private sector there is a contract between the two parties. You go and reveal the contract. What are people going to do? They withdraw the money. That ad hoc Committee contributed to the mess of the SABC today.
‘And actually that ad hoc Committee was not an ad hoc Committee it was the HLAUDI ad hoc Committee. That is the title: HLAUDI ad hoc Committee. So they were supposed to call HLAUDI, you see. And you can see the agenda that they were pushing there, to be honest.’ [our emphasis] [sic].
‘I heard from the lawyers when I was there, that the judge who was presiding over the eight journalists, his wife was in charge of that firm where the wife is working. So the judge was supposed to declare his interest, because if it was another judge it would be a different story. It would be a different story.’
‘Actually, if it is true that the judge did not declare, he should be reported to the relevant authority, which means people won that case. For me it was bias, because I didn’t even understand how people could go and toyi toyi and make that noise that they were making when they need to protect their own country’.
‘I said in my personal view with those journalists, if it was a different judge I think it would be a different outcome. Because the judge did not declare that the wife is responsible for the firm that was responsible for the eight. If you go to Court, check with the SABC, because those issues are public issues. I also saw them there, that the judge was conflicted in the matter. He didn’t declare. So if it was another Court, maybe if it was another judge it would be a different judgment.’” [Numbring as per transcript – Ed.]
In so far as the charges are concerned, the Chairperson noted as follows: “Counsel representing the employee, correctly in my view, argued that the formulation of the charges by the employer results in a duplication of charges. The charges are in my view shorn of all legal niceties [sic] the following:

“The Employee addressed a press conference in circumstances where he ought not to have done so and that the content of his utterances at the press conference, so it is contended by the Employer, in one way or another undermined the employment relationship. It is so that the Employer further contends that the conduct of the Employee emanating from the utterances at the press conference resulted in a breakdown of the trust relationship of employer and employee”.

The Chairperson noted further that ‘‘Counsel representing the SABC reformulated the charges of misconduct levelled against the employee in the following manner:

“Firstly, that he misconducted himself in holding the press conference on 19 April 2017 at which he discussed the affairs of the SABC while on suspension, and

Secondly that he misconducted himself in making a number of offending statements at the press conference relating to (a) board Members, (b) Mr Naidoo, (c) the ad hoc committee, and (d) Justice RGO Le Grange.”

Survey of evidence and argument

The respondent’s case

The respondent’s case was based on the evidence of two witnesses, viz, Mrs Kweyama and Mr K Naidoo and can be summarised as follows:

On 17 February 2014, the Public Protector issued a report relating to her investigation into matters pertaining to the respondent. In her report, the Public Protector found, amongst other things, that the applicant’s appointment as the Acting Chief Operations Officer (“COO”) of the respondent was irregular. She recommended that remedial action be undertaken, including that he be brought before a disciplinary inquiry in relation to various complaints.
On 8 July 2014, the applicant was appointed as COO. This appointment was set aside by Davis J (sitting in the Western Cape High Court) on 27 November 2015. A petition for leave to appeal was dismissed by the SCA on 14 September 2016, with this being the day that it was finally determined that the applicant’s appointment as COO was invalid and set aside. (Between 27 November 2015 and 14 September 2016, the applicant continued in the position of COO.)
On 12 December 2015, Advocate Ederling found the applicant not guilty of the charges brought against him emanating from the Public Protector’s  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1330
  report. On 26 July 2016, Lagrange J (sitting in the Labour Court) delivered judgment in the so-called SABC 8 case. (Solidarity and others v SABC [2017] 1 BLLR 60 (LC)). At this time, the applicant was the COO.
On 22 September 2016, after his petition for leave to appeal to the SCA against the judgment of Davis J was dismissed, the applicant was appointed on a five year fixed-term contract, from September 2016 to September 2021 as Group Executive Corporate Affairs (“GECA”). The contract was signed on behalf of the SABC by Mr Aguma, the then acting Group Chief Executive Officer (“GCEO”), who was directly responsible for appointing the applicant (and was his direct superior).
During the latter part of 2016, the Democratic Alliance brought two applications in the Western Cape High Court. One application related to the disciplinary proceedings where the applicant had been acquitted, and the other application related to his appointment as GECA.
Those applications gave rise to a judgment delivered by Rogers J on 12 December 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the “Rogers Judgment”). In terms of the Rogers’ Judgment, the disciplinary proceedings were declared invalid and reviewed and set aside, and the respondent was directed to commence new disciplinary proceedings in relation to complaints arising from the Public Protector’s report. It was also held that unless and until the negative findings in the Public Protector’s report were reviewed and set aside, or the applicant is exonerated from such findings by way of a valid disciplinary inquiry, he may not hold any position with the respondent. The applicant’s appointment as GECA was also reviewed and set aside. (The Rogers’ Judgment was never appealed, and its orders remain in force.)
In the circumstances, as of 12 December 2016, the applicant was in the most tenuous of all employment positions. He was essentially in a holding pattern, having been effectively suspended pending a disciplinary inquiry into the negative findings made by the Public Protector.
On 24 February 2017, the parliamentary ad hoc committee, which had been established by the National Assembly on 3 November 2016, reported on its inquiry into the fitness of the respondent’s board to discharge its statutory duties. (This was preceded by the hearing of evidence, including from Mr Naidoo (on 9 December 2016); the release of an interim report by the ad hoc committee (on 27 January 2017); and the respondent’s submissions thereon (on 16 February 2016).) Amongst other things, the ad hoc committee recommended the dissolution of the then respondent’s board and the appointment of an interim board. It also recommended that disciplinary proceedings be instituted by the respondent against Mr Aguma on account of him having shown contempt for parliament in his submissions (on behalf of the respondent).
On 27 March 2017, the new interim board was appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National Assembly. The chairperson of the interim board was Mrs Kweyama, with Mr Naidoo also having been amongst its members. (Mr Naidoo had been a member of the previous  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1331
  board, but had resigned in October 2016. Both Mrs Kweyama and Mr Naidoo are members of the current board, which replaced the interim board.)
On 19 April 2017, the applicant addressed the press conference which was widely televised and where it was alleged he discussed the affairs of the respondent and had made the offending statements. As a result thereof the respondent contends that the applicant had:
breached his express contractual duty to use his utmost endeavours to protect and promote its business and interests and to preserve its reputation and goodwill;
breached his express contractual duty to be true and faithful to the respondent in all his dealings with it;
caused the respondent to lose trust and/or confidence in him (grounds for dismissal in terms of his contract of employment);
brought the respondent into serious disrepute (grounds for dismissal in terms of his contract of employment);
brought the respondent into disrepute in his interactions with the media in his public/private capacity (actionable misconduct in terms of the respondent’s media policy); and/or
deliberately caused negative reporting of the respondent in the media (grounds for dismissal in terms of the SABC’s disciplinary code and procedure).

The applicant’s case

The applicant’s case was based on his oral and documentary evidence in the form of an affidavit which he submitted during the disciplinary hearing before Cassim SC, the evidence of Mr Z Mbuli and Dr NA Tshidzumba, and can be summarised as follows:

Following many years of reported problems in the management and governance of the respondent, parliament invoked its parliamentary oversight powers and established the well-known ad hoc Committee Inquiry on the respondent’s board with a mandate to inquire into the fitness of the board to discharge its duties as prescribed in the Broadcasting Act.
The ad hoc parliamentary committee conducted public hearings which were extensively covered both in the local and international media. A number of witnesses were called by the ad hoc parliamentary committee to give evidence of either their personal experiences of the problems under investigation or professional views thereon. A lot was publicly said about the role of the applicant in the public hearings, including allegations by former board member, Mr Naidoo, that there were concerning levels of management corruption and incompetence. The applicant was specifically targeted by Naidoo as the “high school drop-out” that was responsible for decisions that resulted in the alleged financial ruin of the respondent. The respondent was given an opportunity to file its own response to the Interim report of the ad hoc parliamentary committee, which it did. 
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1332
The applicant viewed the conduct of the ad hoc parliamentary committee in respect of allegations made against him by private citizens and former employees of the respondent as being highly prejudicial and unfair by denying him the right to confront his accusers and give his side of the story. The applicant requested the ad hoc committee to give him the necessary opportunity to rebut allegations that had been made against him by Mr Naidoo and others. It refused. Some members of the ad hoc parliamentary committee lamented this lapse of duty by the ad hoc parliamentary committee to act fairly and in accordance with the law in relation to the applicant.
Given the extensive public interest in the ad hoc parliamentary committee, a number of people were concerned that the applicant had not been given an opportunity to state his side of the story. A group of artists, calling themselves Friends of Hlaudi, organised a press conference, and invited the applicant to give his side of the story to the extent possible and to answer questions from the public on any issue of public interest about the respondent. The purpose of the press conference was to provide a public platform for the applicant to respond to questions and inform the public about widespread allegations that had been made about his role at the respondent, during the ad hoc parliamentary committee proceedings.
This press conference was not called to malign or discuss the affairs of the respondent but to give the applicant an opportunity to respond to the allegations of his role at the respondent that had been the subject of public deliberations in the ad hoc parliamentary committee. In other words, the target of the press conference was not the respondent but the ad hoc parliamentary committee of the respondent which had refused to give the applicant an opportunity to respond to various allegations that had been made against him by both private citizens and former employees of the respondent who had appeared before it. One such private citizen who had given evidence before the ad hoc parliamentary committee was Mr Naidoo who during his evidence had insulted the applicant, essentially calling him a high school drop-out and illiterate and irresponsible senior manager.
The press conference was covered and reported on by the respondent, with journalists asking questions at the conference itself.
The applicant summarised his defence to the charges in his affidavit as follows:
He was authorised to address the press conference by Aguma, the then acting GCEO. He also discussed the matter with the former Minister for Communications, Faith Muthambi, and she agreed that the press conference “was an appropriate course of action”. There is no provision in the respondent’s Media Policy that prevented the applicant from attending and addressing the media conference in his personal capacity.
He was entitled to exercise his right to freedom of speech despite being an employee and despite being on suspension. There was no 

condition attached to his suspension that precluded his attendance at or participation in a press conference.

His statements concerning Naidoo and the impropriety of other former board members are disclosures made in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000.
The balance of the statements were in any event within the public domain or simply constitute a restatement of the respondent’s own public utterances.
He has not made any statements pertaining to the interim board.

Analysis of evidence and argument
In terms of section 188 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”):
“(1) A dismissal that is not automatically unfair, is unfair if the employer fails to prove –
(a)  that the reason for dismissal is a fair reason –
related to the employee’s conduct or capacity; or
based on the employer’s operational requirements; and
(b) that the dismissal was effected in accordance with a fair procedure.
(2) Any person considering whether or not the reason for dismissal is a fair reason or whether or not the dismissal was effected in accordance with a fair procedure must take into account any relevant code of good practice issued in terms of this Act.”

  In considering the Code of Good Practice, due weight must be given to employees’ constitutional rights and their understanding of those rights.

In terms of Schedule 8 – Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, as contained in the Act, in determining the substantive fairness of the applicant’s dismissal, I must take into consideration the following:

“Guidelines in cases of dismissal for misconduct Any person who is determining whether a dismissal for misconduct is unfair should consider –

(a) whether or not the employee contravened a rule or standard regulating conduct in, or of relevance to, the workplace; and
(b) if a rule or standard was contravened, whether or not –
the rule was a valid or reasonable rule or standard;
the employee was aware, or could reasonably be expected to have been aware, of the rule or standard;
the rule or standard has been consistently applied by the employer; and
dismissal was an appropriate sanction for the contravention of the rule or standard.”

The Press Conference
Mrs Kweyama gave evidence about the respondent’s Media Policy as follows:

“there is a policy in place on the media, as an example, and on communicating. It also designates who can and cannot speak on behalf of the corporation.”

 
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1334

  Clause 5.10 provides that “[t]he Board chairperson, GCEO, the head group communication and relevant exco members are, as a matter of policy, the lead communicators of the SABC”. Clause 5.13 provides, in turn, that “[a]ny member whose conduct brings the SABC into disrepute in interactions with the media in his public and private capacity will face disciplinary action in accordance with SABC policies”.

The applicant’s defences, in essence, are that: (i) he had the permission of Mr Aguma to address the press conference; (ii) his utterances enhanced the reputation of the respondent rather than undermining it, and served to protect the respondent; (iii) he was responding to issues raised at the ad hoc committee; (iv) he was speaking in his private capacity; and (v) he had the right to do so in line with his right to freedom of expression.
These defences are improbable for the following reasons:
Regarding the applicants first defence, the contention that Mr Aguma gave permission for the holding of the press conference is not borne out by the evidence presented and is dismissed as being utterly false for the following reasons:
The minutes of the special board meeting on 21 April 2017 (at which a decision was taken to charge the applicant for his misconduct pertaining to the press conference) record that Mr Aguma supported the decision to take disciplinary action against the applicant (rather than alleging that he knew about the press conference and gave the applicant permission to address it).
Secondly, when asked during a parliamentary committee meeting whether he had given the applicant permission, Mr Aguma denied that he had done so.
Thirdly, Mr Aguma’s affidavit (relied on by the applicant) contains a patent untruth, namely that no resolution was adopted to subject the applicant to disciplinary action, despite the existence of minutes confirming same and Mr Aguma’s express support thereof.
Fourthly, an adverse inference must be drawn from the applicant’s failure to call Mr Aguma, despite it having been indicated that he would be called.
When the shoe started pinching (as the respondent put it), the applicant advanced the position that he, in any event, did not need Mr Aguma’s permission to hold the press conference, and had asked him as a courtesy. This argument is untenable as it contradicts the applicant’s affidavit which he submitted during both the disciplinary hearing and at the arbitration hearing, and which affidavit does not advance the said defence. In addition, at his disciplinary inquiry, the applicant accepted that, in terms of the media policy, he had to obtain the permission of the board chairperson.
The applicant’s second defence was that in both his affidavit and oral evidence, he had stated that he “attended the conference in his personal capacity. He was not there to communicate for the SABC and therefore  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1335
  could not be said to have breached the Media Policy of the SABC”. However if one considers the content of the conference, it is apparent that the applicant addressed matters relating to his role as an employee of the respondent as opposed to private matters. Furthermore the applicant conceded under cross-examination that the ad hoc committee’s report was critical of him in his capacity as an employee of the respondent and that the press conference was called to respond to that report. Hence, the applicant’s defence that he was addressing the conference in his personal capacity cannot be sustained.
In relation to the applicant’s third defence it is difficult to see how the respondent’s reputation could be enhanced by the applicant’s remarks. His remarks were, amongst other things, critical of its board, were unfounded, and caused embarrassment. They were the antithesis of remarks which would have enhanced the respondent’s reputation.
Turning to his fourth defence, the applicant’s utterances plainly went beyond a response to the ad hoc committee. At least in relation to Judge Lagrange, the applicant conceded under cross-examination that “I didn’t deal with the issue of the judge because of the ad hoc committee”. He was however not prepared to make the obvious concession that necessarily flows from this, ie the press conference went beyond a response to the ad hoc committee.
Turning to the applicant’s fifth defence, in relation to his reliance on his right to freedom of expression, he advanced the argument that “A ban on employees to attend and address any press conference simply cannot stand constitutional scrutiny in light of the constitutional protection afforded to association, expression, belief or opinion. It is not only unlawful and unconstitutional but is fundamentally irrational to impose an employment condition that would limit the right of employees in whatever capacity to associate with anybody, including the Friends of Hlaudi”. The applicant’s right to freedom of expression was not absolute, in the sense that it was limited by the fact that he was precluded from addressing the affairs of and criticising the respondent in public through a press conference, this being consistent with the contractual / policy restrictions that the applicant had agreed to and in the context of having failed to deal with his concerns internally. The offending statements made by the applicant do not enjoy legal protection because they impaired the dignity of others; they were not in the public interest; many of them were patently false; they were all made in the absence of good faith (in one way or another); and there were simply no exceptional features justifying the applicant’s criticism of the respondent in the media in the manner that he did.

The utterances made at the Press Conference regarding the Interim Board
The following utterances were made concerning the Board:

“Because all these Board members go there and serve their own interests. But the worst part is you know why there is a crisis at the SABC? Most of them they don’t work]. When they don’t work, they are also checking the chocolate cake. Why do you take people who are unemployed and put them as Board members? Why can’t you put people who are committed, who run 

 
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1336

their own business, who have time to make sure the SABC runs professionally and the profit is there”.

The contention was that the applicant, in uttering the aforesaid statement, had disparaged the interim board of the respondent at the time, by stating on a public platform that they serve their own interests; insinuating that they are corrupt (in “checking the chocolate cake”); and referring to them as “unemployed”. The applicant’s defence was that he was referring to the previous board since he had personal experience working with them and not to the interim board in place at the time of the press conference. This argument does not have merit, as a close reading of the comments made indicate that the applicant spoke in the present tense referring to the interim board. Had the applicant intended to refer to the past board, he would have stated so during the conference and would have also informed members of the interim board, after the conference, that the comments were not directed at them.
The second defence was that the remarks, in any event, constituted fair comment, given that they were made in reference to the issues that were canvased extensively before the ad hoc parliamentary committee involving the fitness of the previous board members of the respondent. Given that the applicant had been a board member of the previous board and a subject extensively mentioned during the ad hoc parliamentary public proceedings, he was entitled to express a view on the reasons for the crisis at the respondent (which crisis was the basis on which the ad hoc parliamentary committee had been established and the interim board subsequently appointed.). The evidence has established that the applicant had throughout the press conference made reference to the board in the present tense. Hence the interim board’s conclusion that the comments were directed to them was a reasonable one. This was the evidence of Ms Kweyama, that it was her, the public and the shareholder’s understanding that the utterances were directed at the interim board and not the previous board. The utterances made by the applicant were offensive and disparaging in the sense that they conveyed the message that the interim board members were lazy, corrupt and served their own interests, which was blatantly untrue.

The utterances made at the Press Conference regarding Mr Naidoo
The statement about Mr Naidoo is as follows: “Let me tell you about Krish Naidoo. You see, when you are a sell-out you will be a sell-out forever. He is going to sell out these Board members again”. The applicants defence to the allegation was that the comments made were not prohibited in terms of his contract of employment. The applicant’s case was that the statement that Mr Naidoo was a sell-out was made in retaliation to his remarks at the ad hoc parliamentary committee about him where Mr Naidoo called the applicant a high school drop-out. The applicant’s contention was that his remarks about Mr Naidoo were true and made in the public interest.
What is apparent from the utterances is that the applicant makes reference to “these Board Members”, a clear reference to the interim board at the  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1337
  time. Secondly the insinuation was that Mr Naidoo would sell out the interim board members just as he had sold out the previous board members.
Whatever the justification that the applicant sought to advance in making the utterances, he was aware at the time that he was a senior employee who could not conduct himself in the reckless, irresponsible and disdainful manner that he did, he was well aware of the internal mechanisms that he could have utilised to raise his grievances as opposed to embarking on an unbridled tirade at a press conference.

The utterances made at the Press Conference regarding the ad hoc committee
The applicant’s offending utterances concerning the ad hoc committee were to the effect that it had a political agenda, that it had contributed to a mess at the respondent, and that it was a “Hlaudi ad hoc committee”. His defence was that he was entitled “to robustly criticise a parliamentary process that had refused to give effect to his right to be heard in circumstances that justified it. The criticisms of the ad hoc parliamentary committee were not against the respondent and it is unclear how such comments could possibly be read as a contravention of the employment contract”.
The evidence has established that the ad hoc committee cannot be viewed in isolation. It is an important oversight body that has an important oversight role to play in so far as the manner in which the respondent exercises it functions as a public broadcaster. The applicant was unable to advance any evidence in support of his conspiracy theory about there being a political agenda against him, or to clearly articulate the basis for his allegation that the ad hoc committee had “contributed to the mess” at the respondent. It was the evidence of Mrs Kweyama that the ad hoc committee had in fact contributed to getting the SABC back on track. In addition the applicant also conceded that the ad hoc committee was a parliamentary committee mandated to inquire into the fitness of the board to discharge its duties as prescribed by the Broadcasting Act, and that its report dealt with a wide variety of issues, including issues that did not pertain to him, thus putting paid to the contention that the committee was a “Hlaudi ad hoc committee” designed to deal solely with the applicant.
Given the nexus in the relationship between the ad hoc committee and the respondent, the respondent was justified in taking a view that the conduct of the applicant towards the ad hoc committee was offensive, demeaning and disrespectful and in conflict with his position as a senior employee.

The utterances made at the Press Conference regarding Judge Lagrange
This aspect of the charge has its foundation in the matter of eight journalists – widely referred to as the “SABC 8” who were dismissed by the respondent on 18 July 2016. Solidarity (through their attorneys, Serfontein, Viljoen and Swart) instituted an urgent application in the Labour Court in which they represented four of the eight journalists. Judge Lagrange presided over that matter. On 26 July 2016, he determined the merits thereof, declaring their dismissals unlawful and ordering certain SABC personnel  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1338
  to file affidavits to show why they should not be held personally liable for the costs (with the issue of costs being postponed). The judgment on the merits has not been appealed.
A separate application was subsequently brought by BEMAWU (represented by Webber Wentzel) on behalf of other members of the SABC 8. The merits were presided over by Judge Gush (on 28 July 2016), with the issue of costs being dealt with on the same basis as was done by Judge Lagrange in the Solidarity matter. Judge Gush went on to order that the determination of costs in the BEMAWU matter was to be decided together with the costs in the Solidarity matter.
Ms Pamela Stein is an attorney at Webber Wentzel, who were not the attorneys in the Solidarity matter which Judge Lagrange presided over, but were, instead, the attorneys in the BEMAWU matter which Judge Gush presided over. In circumstances where the determination of costs in both matters was pending, on 22 November 2016, Judge Lagrange (through his associate) wrote a letter to the parties disclosing that his wife works at Webber Wentzel. In the light of this disclosure, the SABC’s erstwhile attorneys addressed a letter to the Judge President on 29 November 2016, requesting that the determination of costs in the Solidarity matter be dealt with by Judge Lagrange, and that the determination of costs in the BEMAWU matter be dealt with by Judge Gush. On 19 April 2017, and while the determination of costs was pending, the applicant held the press conference. This was 11 months after Judge Lagrange had delivered judgment on the merits in the Solidarity matter.
The applicant’s accusations that Judge Lagrange “was presiding over the eight journalists [whilst] his wife was in charge of the firm”, that Judge Lagrange was biased and had an interest in the matter which he did not disclose, and that this impacted on the outcome of the case, are in the light of the aforementioned facts without foundation, unjustified and were recklessly made. Thus a reasonable conclusion would be that had the applicant taken the time to examine the facts, he would have realised that it was not the judge’s wife or her firm which represented the eight journalists that appeared before Judge Lagrange. The respondent was thus justified in taking the view that the accusations sullied the name of a judge of the Labour Court in a high profile matter involving the SABC, without any justification, causing it embarrassment.

The right to freedom of expression
The applicant’s case is that as an employee he had an unqualified or unfettered right to freedom of expression as enshrined in section 16 of the Constitution. It was further contended that nowhere in section 16 of the Constitution is there a limitation on the right of an employee to freedom of expression. The argument is that Employment obligations are regulated in contractual relations between employees and employers. An employment obligation requiring that employees may not publicly criticise Parliament, politicians, public figures like judges or even the respondent on the face of it is unconstitutional. Similarly, an employment obligation that bans employees of a public broadcaster from attending and addressing a  
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1339
  public platform to express views on matters of national importance appears on the face of it to be an unjustified restraint on constitutional rights.
The right of freedom of expression is not unlimited. The principle was explained as follows in S v Mamabolo (E-TV and others Intervening) 2001 (3) SA 409 (CC) [also reported at 2001 (5) BCLR 449 (CC) – Ed]:

“. . . the right to freedom of expression cannot be said automatically to trump the right to human dignity. The right to dignity is at least as worthy of protection as the right to freedom of expression. How these two rights are to be balanced, in principle and in any particular set of circumstances, is not a question that can or should be addressed here. What is clear though and must be stated, is that freedom of expression does not enjoy superior status in our law.”

In the eployment context, freedom of expression by an employee in the form of employer criticism in the media may potentially enjoy judicial protection if:
the disclosure is made in the public interest (and typically does not involve a matter of only private concern);
the employee does not – either dishonestly or negligently – indulge in misleading statements, and has no reason to doubt their veracity; and
the employee acts in good faith (i.e. with no ulterior motive, revenge or malice; without personalising the complaint and having exhausted internal remedies)

  Hamata and another v Chairperson, Peninsula Technikon Internal Disciplinary Committee and others (2002) 23 ILJ 1531 (SCA) [also reported at 2002 (7) BCLR 756 (A) – Ed].

  Rycroft, Privacy in the Workplace (2018) 39 ILJ 725 at 747.

The utterances made by the applicant during the press conference were made in his capacity as a senior employee and caused reputational harm to the respondent as a public institution. The statements did nothing to advance the interests of the public. His conduct had in fact breached his contractual duty to use his utmost endeavours to protect and promote the business and interests of the respondent and to preserve its reputation and goodwill. The applicant, in making disparaging, reckless and misleading statements, had failed to act in good faith thereby breaching his express contractual duty to be true and faithful to the respondent in all his dealings with it. Given the immense harm caused by the conduct of the applicant to the respondent, it can hardly be argued that judicial protection should be afforded to the applicant under the guise of freedom of expression. The applicant had breached his contractual duties as per his contract of employment as well as the provisions of the media policy. The contractual obligations/standards and the provisions of the media policy were valid and reasonable and known to the applicant. There was no challenge to the consistent application of the standard/rule in so far as other employees are concerned. 
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1340
Insofar as procedural fairness is concerned, the applicant’s case was that the interim board did not have the power to approve the institution of disciplinary proceedings against him as he was then not a member the board. He could only have been disciplined in terms of the respondent’s Disciplinary Code. It was argued that the power to approve the institution of disciplinary action and to dismiss the GCEO, CFO, COO, GE Risk and Company Secretary lies with the board, whilst the power to institute disciplinary action and terminate the employment of the rest of the staff of the respondent lies with management.
The applicant was, as submitted by the respondent, in a sui generis position. He was, in terms of the Rogers’ Judgment, holding no official position as an employee at the respondent, and he thus had no line manager in its employee structure. Moreover, with reference to the complaints arising from the Public Protector’s report, the Rogers’ Judgment provided for the board to be responsible for appointing an initiator and a chairperson in relation to disciplining the applicant – this being in recognition of the board’s power to discipline him.
In addition, Mr Aguma, as the acting GCEO, was conflicted and compromised: he was the person who had irregularly appointed the applicant as GECA. The Rogers’ Judgment had the following to say about Mr Aguma:

‘“We know that if the remnant of the SABC’s board had got its way in September 2016, Motsoeneng would have been appointed as the Acting COO. The remnant, including Aguma, the Acting GCEO, appears to have been hell-bent on keeping him in the highest position possible.’ . . . Aguma cannot be trusted to take a disinterested decision in the SABC’s best interests.’

‘The current Acting GCEO [ie Aguma] as well as the one remaining non-executive director are firm supporters of Motsoeneng and would still like to see him as COO. It is fanciful to suppose that people within the SABC whose cooperation might be required for a credible disciplinary enquiry will discern much difference in Motsoeneng’s sphere of influence.’”

In any event, Mr Aguma supported the decision to discipline the applicant. This is reflected in the minutes of the special board meeting on 21 April 2017 at which a decision was taken to charge the applicant.
I, therefore, find that there is no merit in the procedural challenge to the dismissal as advanced by the applicant.
In considering the appropriateness of the dismissal, in Sidumo and another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and others (2007) 28 ILJ 2405 (CC) [also reported at [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC) – Ed] the Constitutional Court stated as follows:

“In approaching the dismissal dispute impartially, a commissioner will take into account the totality of the circumstances. He or she will necessarily take into account the importance of the rule that had been breached. The commissioner must of course consider the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal, as he or she must take into account the basis of the employee’s challenge to the dismissal. There are other factors that will require consideration. For example, the harm caused by the employee’s conduct, whether additional training and induction may result in the employee not repeating the 

 
[2018] 12 BALR 1325 (CCMA) at 1341

misconduct, the effect of the dismissal of the employee and his or her long-service record . . .”

In the final analysis, the applicant had breached the relationship of trust and confidence and had brought the respondent into disrepute. The applicant had breached the duty to act with good faith towards his employer. He effectively worked against the interests of the respondent and placed himself in a position where his personal interests, motives and intentions were in direct conflict with that of the respondent. Having taken the totality of circumstances into account I find the sanction of dismissal to be appropriate.
The respondent has discharged the onus of proving that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally and substantively fair.

Award
The dismissal of the applicant, George Hlaudi Motsoeneng, by the respondent, South African Broadcasting Corporation SOC Limited, is found to be procedurally and substantively fair.
There shall be no order as to costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document