



Hove / Supacubed CC [2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GATW7417-15
Date: 17/07/2015
Before: N Willemse, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Theft — Employee dismissed for “possible involvement in theft” on strength of hearsay allegations from whistleblowers and polygraph test results — Dismissal unfair as no concrete evidence to link employee with theft.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was dismissed after being found guilty of “possible involvement in theft” of tools from one of the respondent’s stores. The applicant was among several employees who failed a polygraph test. After his dismissal he was told that if he underwent another polygraph test and passed, he would be reinstated. The applicant contended that he was working at another site when the theft occurred, and denied that he was involved.

The Commissioner noted that proof that an employee actually committed a disciplinary offence requires a proper investigation and the evidence that links the employee to the offence. The respondent had relied exclusively on information received from whistleblowers and the polygraph test results. The evidence presented at the arbitration relating to the whistleblowers was hearsay, and the person who administered the polygraph tests had not been called to confirm the veracity of the test results. Polygraph test results do not themselves prove complicity in misconduct. The Commissioner ruled the dismissal substantively unfair.

The Commissioner held further that the dismissal was procedurally unfair because the applicant had not been given adequate opportunity to state his case.

The applicant was awarded compensation equal to five month’s salary.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
This is the arbitration award between employee, Tafadzwa Hove, (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”) and employer, Supacubed CC, (hereinafter referred to as “the respondent”). 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1173
The proceedings were held on 8 July 2015 at the CCMA offices in Tshwane 2nd floor Metro Park Building, 351 Francis Baard Street, Tshwane.
The proceedings were recorded both electronically and manually.
The applicant was present, the respondent was represented by Mr Johan Botha the owner of the respondent.
The parties prepared paginated and indexed bundles of documents, the respondents bundle was marked “A1–24” and the applicant’s bundle was marked “B1–4”. As regards the status of the documents, the parties agreed that the documents were what they purport to be, however, rights were reserved to lead evidence if deemed necessary as to the contents of the documents. The applicant also submitted a voice recording into the proceedings.

Issues to be decided
The purpose of this arbitration is to determine whether or not the applicant’s dismissal was substantively and procedurally fair. Should I find that the dismissal was unfair, I am required to grant appropriate relief in accordance with the provisions of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995, as amended (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”).

Background to the dispute
The respondent conducts its business in the construction sector, and mainly renovates inner city buildings.
The respondent can be described as a “medium employer” in that it employs approximately 150 employees, as envisaged in the Code of Good Practice: Dismissals as contained in Schedule 8 to the Act (“the Code – item 3(1)). The respondent employs on a fixed-term contract for two years before employees are permanent.
The applicant commenced employment in June 2013 in the capacity of a site agent at the construction site called Sentrakol; earning a salary of R275 per day and worked 5 days per week.
On 15 June 2015, pursuant to a “formal” disciplinary inquiry, the applicant was found “guilty” of the disciplinary offence, whereafter the chairperson deemed dismissal as an appropriate sanction for the disciplinary breach. The following charge was levelled against the applicant:
“(1) Possible involvement in theft.”
The applicant referred an unfair dismissal dispute to the CCMA on 22 June 2015. The matter was set down for 8 July 2015 as a con/arb hearing; the matter remained unresolved and a certificate was issued. Thereafter, the matter was arbitrated. 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1174

Summary of evidence

Respondent’s evidence

One witness was called to give evidence on behalf of the respondent. He testified under oath and I will now summarise his evidence as follows:

He testified on 24 May 2015, there was a burglary at one of their construction sites, Sentrakol, the respondent employed an internal security guard at the construction site from 4pm–6pm; employees knock-off at 4pm; from 6pm an external security guard company is placed on site to monitor the site; on that specific day the internal security guard did not arrive for work.
He testified that the equipment and tools are stored in their stores; the content of the stores were all stolen, the value of the theft was approximately R200 000 the insurance only covered R60 000 of the loss whilst the remainder R140 000 was not covered by the insurance; resulting with the respondent suffering a loss.
The witness conducted an internal investigation; the internal security guard was interviewed; he implicated a few staff members including the applicant. Five other employees were interviewed; due to the company’s Whistleblower Protection Policy the five employees were not able to testify at the proceedings.
He stated that the respondent has a contractual polygraph testing clause with its employees; HR Policy: Code of Conduct made provision for polygraph testing. Based on the information received; management elected to instruct all senior staff at their Sentrakol site, approximately 25 employees, to undergo polygraph testing. Seven out of the 25 staff failed the polygraph test; the applicant was one of them. Five of the seven employees who failed the polygraph test and their names were mentioned by the whistleblower employees whilst the remaining two employees were contract workers; management elected to terminate their services and they were paid out the remainder of their fixed-term contracts; management did not want to base their decision purely on the polygraph results.
He testified that the applicant was on a fixed-term contract that was due to expire on 30 June 2015; he was implicated in the theft and he failed his polygraph test. The polygraph test was conducted by a third party, PAV Polygraph Services, on instruction by the respondent. The results of the polygraph testing indicate that there was a significant reaction by the applicant; certain questions were inconclusive; and there was an indication of deception by the applicant.
On 11 June 2015 the applicant was suspended and notified to attend a disciplinary hearing for “possible involvement in theft” scheduled for 15 June 2015; the applicant pleaded not guilty at the hearing and said he was not involved; the witness was the chairperson of the hearing; after he applied his mind to the facts, the outcome of the hearing was a dismissal. 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1175
After the applicant was dismissed; the witness told the applicant that he could undergo a second polygraph test; at a polygraph tester of his choice; should he pass the test then would be reinstated with back-pay. The witness testified the offer was made to the applicant because employees believe that the respondent might have appointed a polygraph tester that was biased. All outstanding payments were made to the applicant; the applicant signed a full and final settlement agreement for all claims emanating from the termination of the employment relationship.
During cross-examination the witness was requested to indicate whether the applicant was working on Sunday 24 May 2015 when the incident happened and he testified the applicant was not working; however the applicant was directly involved in the theft according to the information they received; it could be assumed that the applicant arrived on site after the site closed; based on the polygraph results; one of the questions was “Did you break in at the Sentrakol site on that weekend?” and the applicant had a significant reaction to the question which illustrates deception. The witness was probed to indicate the amount of employees that were dismissed for the incident and he indicated 7 employees. The witness was examined on how the 7 employees where involved in the theft; he indicated that according to the information received the 7 employees were dismissed for planning the theft, some employees were not directly involved in the theft and others were directly involved; because of the size of the equipment stolen employees could not have executed the crime alone; the respondent has drivers working for them; five drivers were instructed to undergo a polygraph test; all the drivers passed the test.
The witness was requested whether the polygraph tester was present to testify on the polygraph test and results and he replied in the negative because they did not believe it was necessary to have them present at the proceedings. The witness was requested to explain certain terms on the polygraph results such as “inconclusive reading” and “significant reaction”. The witness could not explain the terms and conceded that the polygraph tester would have been in a better position to explain the terms.
The witness was probed about the amount of whistleblower employees there were and what precise information was conveyed to the respondent; the witness testified that there were five whistleblower employees that were interviewed separately and all five implicated the applicant in the theft; only one confessed and said he was physically involved in the theft; the others were not directly involved but what they said may be hearsay, however, the respondent elected to rely on the information; the polygraph tests corroborated the information that was received by the whistleblowers. The witness was requested to refer us to the Whistleblower Protection Policy of the respondent and he testified that it was not present.
It was put to the witness that the applicant works over weekends and he worked on private jobs that the respondent was aware of, the witness confirmed this. 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1176
The applicant put it to the witness that he was not given an opportunity to explain his side of the story during the disciplinary hearing; and that there was no disciplinary hearing because he was given a letter of dismissal before he was allowed to prove his innocence. The witness disagreed and said the applicant was notified of the hearing on 11 June 2015; that he attended the hearing on the 15 June 2015; and that during the hearing the applicant explained that he was not involved in the theft.
The recording of the disciplinary hearing was played to the witness; from the recording it was established: the applicant was walking to the office of the witness; the witness explained the theft at Sentrakol site and that the applicant was implicated; that the witness spoke to the applicant about the offer of the second polygraph test; that the applicant said he was not involved in the theft; the witness continued to speak about the offer of the second polygraph test; that the witness told the applicant his UI19 will be given to him and that the leave days and suspension money would be paid to him; that the witness said to the applicant he hoped the applicant did another polygraph test; the witness handed the applicant his UI19; cheque and payslip; that the applicant had to sign for the outstanding monies received and the letter of dismissal. After the recording was played to the witness; the witness said that the recording was for 18 June 2015 when the applicant collected his outstanding monies and cheque. The applicant disagreed and showed the date of the recording was 15 June 2015 and the alleged disciplinary hearing was held on 15 June 2015. The witness disagreed.
The respondent closed its case, nothing further emerged from the cross-examination and there was no re-examination.

Applicant’s evidence

The applicant was the only witness who testified in support of his claim, after being sworn in, his evidence was summarised as follows:

The applicant heard from his colleagues that on 24 May 2015 the storeroom of Sentrakol was broken into; that there was a lot of equipment stolen and that a truck must have been used because of the size of the equipment.
At the beginning of May 2015, the applicant informed the respondent that he would not be working weekends because he would be assisting one Andrew Mulalo with a private job in Hammanskraal; they are building a surgery for dialysis. The witness testified that every weekend he stays in Hammanskraal to work on the project; that he resides in Pretoria; that it is costly to commute for the weekend to Hammanskraal.
The witness testified that they usually purchase material for the project at Built IT Hammanskraal and K Carrim Boom Street; that on 23 May 2015 he purchased material from Build IT Hammanskraal for the work they planned to do on Sunday 24 May 2015; that he provided a receipt to illustrate same. 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1177
The applicant provided two photos illustrating a pot of food that was being cooked at 2:50pm in Hammanskraal on 24 May 2015; to illustrate that he was not present when the theft took place and that he was in Hammanskraal at the time of the theft.
He further testified that on Monday 25 May 2015 he reported for work; the employees were told of the burglary; they were requested not to enter the stores; they could not work because there was no equipment. On 2 June 2015 they were informed by Mr Botha that all employees were instructed to undergo polygraph tests; which was conducted by a third party; there were no investigations done; police were also not present; only polygraph tests were conducted.
He testified that on 11 June 2015 he was suspended and notified to attend a disciplinary hearing on 15 June 2015. On the date of the hearing he was handed a letter of dismissal and the UI19 paperwork. All outstanding monies were paid to him.
Under cross-examination it was put to the applicant that the receipts dated 23 May 2015 are irrelevant; the witness disagreed and said that the receipts are confirmation of the project that he is currently working on over weekends. The applicant was questioned why the photos were not presented at the disciplinary hearing and he indicated that there was no disciplinary hearing; the decision for dismissal was made before he could defend himself; the letter of dismissal was there on the date of the disciplinary hearing.
Nothing further emerged from the cross-examination and there was no re-examination. The applicant closed his case.

Analysis of the evidence and argument
In dismissal disputes the onus of proof that the dismissal is fair rests on the employer. (See: section 192 (2) of the Act). In the matter before the Commission, the respondent had to prove on the balance of probabilities that the dismissal of the applicant was both substantively and procedurally fair.
In Sidumo and another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd and others (2007) 28 ILJ 2405 (CC) [also reported at [2007] 12 BLLR 1097 (CC) – Ed] Ngcobo J commented as follows:

“. . . to determine whether the decision of the Respondent to dismiss the Applicant was fair and all relevant circumstances must be taken into account.”

In terms of the provisions of section 138(6) as well as section 188(2) of the Act, I was obliged to take into account any relevant Code of Good Practice that was issued in terms of the Act in determining the substantive and procedural fairness of the applicant’s dismissal.
For the purpose of deciding the substantive fairness of the applicant’s dismissal I took into account, article 7 of Schedule 8 Code of Good Practice: Dismissal that sets out the guidelines for employers to follow 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1178
  when dismissing an employee for misconduct. The employer is required to determine:
“1. Whether or not the employee contravened a rule/standard regulating conduct in the workplace and
2. Whether the rule was contravened:
• Whether the rule was reasonable and valid;
• Whether the Applicant was aware of the rule or reasonably expected to be aware of the rule;
• Whether the rule was consistently applied and
• Whether dismissal was the appropriate sanction.”
The applicant was charged and ultimately dismissed for possible involvement in theft. It is common cause that the respondent has a disciplinary policy or code and that the rule exists. The applicant was aware of the rule and the rule is considered to be valid and reasonable. What was in dispute was whether the applicant breached the rule regarding theft and whether dismissal was the appropriate sanction.
Proof that the employee actually committed the offence charged; presupposes a proper investigation of the allegation against the employee, and the presentation of evidence that links the employee with the offence. Proof on a balance of probabilities means that the evidence points more probably to the conclusion that the employee committed the alleged misconduct, than to his innocence. However, a mere suspicion of guilt does not satisfy the test of proof on a balance of probabilities.1
Theft can be defined as the unlawful, intentional appropriation of movable, corporeal property belonging to another. Therefore, the respondent must prove that the applicant unlawfully and intentionally appropriated company property on 24 May 2015.
The witness of the respondent led evidence that all employees have a contractual obligation to undergo polygraph tests as part of disciplinary investigations. The respondent’s evidence was two-fold; it relied largely on the polygraph test results and information from the whistleblower employees.
At the outset I deemed it of importance to place on record that the respondent’s case in its entirety was based on the oral testimony of Mr Johan Botha. For reasons only known to the respondent, it did not call as witnesses the expert that conducted the polygraph test, or submit affidavits/statements of the whistleblower employees. During the proceedings the witness of the respondent conceded that the polygraph tester/expert would have been in a better position to answer the questions relating to the polygraph results; which the respondent relied on when dismissing the applicant.
The first part of the respondents evidence related to the investigation that the witness conducted with the whistleblower employees; the witness testified on what was told to him by the whistleblower employees; no statements by the employees or even the whistleblower protection policy 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1179
  were furnished as evidence to corroborate the witness testimony. Only one of the five whistleblower employees confessed because he was involved in the theft and the remaining four whistleblower employees conveyed hearsay evidence to the respondent. Therefore a large amount of the witness testimony was second-hand evidence; I admitted such evidence however I attached very little weight to such evidence because there was no direct evidence that corroborated the former and was not inclined to challenging the information provided by the whistleblower employees.
The second part of the respondent’s evidence related to the polygraph test results which the witness could not lead evidence on. Polygraph test results cannot be used as conclusive proof of guilt of the subject of the enquiry; as it is not sufficiently persuasive on its own and such evidence is admitted if it corroborates other evidence. In the matter before me it is the respondent’s evidence that the polygraph test results corroborate the statements of the whistleblower employees; however the latter evidence is hearsay evidence before me with little weight attached to it.
In Building Materials (Pty) Ltd (2006) 27 ILJ (CCMA) [sic] it was held that:

“Polygraph tests may be useful in investigations, but polygraphic evidence does not constitute reliable proof.”

In DHL Supply Chain (Pty) Ltd and others v NBCRFLI and others [2014] 9 BLLR 860 (LAC) 13 May 2014 the court held that:

“The inference to be drawn from the failure of the test is useful as material to determine probabilities. In the absence of expert evidence to explain what that inference is, either generically, or within the bounds of the specific instance itself, and also to justify the explanation of what that is, there is nothing usable at all that might contribute to the probabilities.

The Court held that the reliability of polygraph evidence, at best, remains an open question, and any litigant seeking to invoke it for legitimate purposes, must adduce expert evidence of its conceptual cogency and the accuracy of this application in every given case.”

The applicant presented direct evidence of the project that he works on weekends; the respondent is aware thereof. In uncontested evidence the applicant presented photos of his activities on 24 May 2015 when the theft took place at the workplace. I attach a lot of weight on direct evidence that was presented to me as the applicant could substantiate his whereabouts.
In De Beer v Trudon (Pty) Ltd, the Court with approval referred to the matter of Food and Allied Workers Union and others v Amalgamated Beverage Industries Ltd (1994) 15 ILJ 1057 (LAC) [also reported at [1994] 12 BLLR 25 (LAC) – Ed] where it was held:

“An evidential foundation had to be laid and that a party could not merely rely on arguments only, as arguments without evidential basis would be no more than speculation.”

 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1180
In Bargaining Council for the Furniture Manufacturing Industry, KZN v UKD Marketing CC and others (2013) 34 ILJ 96 (LAC) [also reported at [2013] 2 BLLR 119 (LAC) – Ed] it was held that:

“An adverse inference will be drawn against a party for failing to testify only if the evidence of the other party calls for a reply . . .”

  I am not convinced by the evidence of the respondent that the applicant had breached its rule relating to the theft that took place on 24 May 2015, as the applicant was not present when the theft took place and, therefore, the rule of the respondent was not breached by the applicant.

It is, therefore, my finding that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively unfair in that the respondent failed to prove that the applicant had breached its rule as the applicant did not commit theft.

Procedural fairness
The CCMA guidelines on Misconduct published in terms of item 115(2)(G) and Schedule 8 article 4 of the Act provides as follows concerning procedural fairness:
“1. In determining procedural fairness in the absence of workplace disciplinary procedures, the relevant facts should be summarised and analysed under the following heads:
1.1 The employer must notify the employee of the allegations of misconduct using a form and a language that the employee can reasonably understand . . .
1.2 The employee should be allowed a reasonable time to prepare a response to the allegations . . .
1.3 The employee should be allowed the assistance of a trade union representative or fellow employee in preparing a response and in stating a case in any enquiry . . .
1.4 The employee should be given the opportunity to state a case in response to the allegations . . .
1.5 The employer should communicate the decision taken, preferably in writing, furnish the employee with the reasons, and, if dismissed, remind the employee of the right to refer a dispute to the CCMA, a council with jurisdiction, or in terms of any dispute resolution procedure in a collective agreement.”
The applicant wishes to challenge the fairness of the procedure followed by the respondent on the basis that he was not given an opportunity to state his case to the chairperson; as there was no disciplinary hearing conducted. It is common cause that the applicant was suspended and notified of a disciplinary hearing.

  [Numbering as per transcript.]

CCMA Guidelines: Misconduct Arbitrations item 61.4 of the Act contemplates when granting an employee the opportunity to state its case it can be done in writing or in a meeting format, there is no requirement to hold a formal meeting. In this matter the respondent elected to conduct an enquiry. 
[2015] 11 BALR 1172 (CCMA) at 1181
Sec 61.4 of the Act goes further and says should the employer elect to hold a formal meeting, the meeting should be conducted in a manner that permits the employee to state its case. The determining factor of assessing fairness is whether the employee was given a proper opportunity to state a case. This would mean to call and cross-examine witnesses or to grant the employee an opportunity to provide an explanation.
In the matter before me the applicant provided a voice recording of 15 May 2015, the date of the disciplinary enquiry. It was evident that the applicant was not given an opportunity to state his side of the case; the witness of the respondent discussed the contents of the letter of dismissal with the applicant and his final payment of outstanding monies.
In Avril Elizabeth Home for the Mentally Handicapped v CCMA and others (2006) 27 ILJ 1644 (LC) [also reported at 2006] 9 BLLR 833 (LC) – Ed] the court held:

“The employer was merely required to conduct an investigation, give the employee or his representative an opportunity to respond to the allegation after a reasonable period and thereafter to take a decision and give the employee notice thereof.”

In that case the court set out the minimum requirements for procedural fairness, in the matter before me the respondent met the minimum requirements set out in the CCMA Guidelines: Misconduct Arbitrations.
Therefore after having applied my mind to the facts before me, I on a balance of probabilities, find that the procedure followed by the Respondent was unfair.
I, therefore, find that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively and procedurally unfair.
In exercising discretion as to the appropriate relief, the Applicant seeks compensation.
I have a duty in terms of section 194(1) of the Act the amount in compensation:

“Must be just and equitable in all the circumstances, but may not be more than the equivalent of 12 months’ remuneration . . .”

I was guided by the provisions of item 130(1) of the CCMA Guidelines: Misconduct Arbitrations – Awarding Compensation. Having regard to the circumstances that led to the termination of employment and the events thereafter it was my finding that compensation to an amount equal to five (five) months’ salary, would be just and equitable in all the circumstances.

Award
It is my finding that the dismissal of the applicant, Tafadzwa Hove, by the respondent, Supacubed CC, was substantively and procedurally unfair.
The respondent, Supacubed CC, is hereby ordered to pay the applicant, Tafadzwa Hove, an amount of R27 500 [which is the equivalent of five months’ remuneration calculated at R275 x 5 days pw = R1 375 x 4.33 weeks

= R5 500 pm x 5 months = Total amount R27 500 to be paid by not later than Wednesday 5 August 2015.

Should the respondent, Supacubed CC, fail to adhere or comply with the award as stipulated in paragraphs 2 (supra) then the applicant, Tafadzwa Hove, may approach the Commission of Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for assistance in instituting enforcement proceedings in terms of the provisions of section 143 of the labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (as amended).

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	 Maohlodi v East Rand Gold and Uranium Co Ltd (1988) 9 ILJ 597 (IC) at 601I–J.


End of Document