



Mabaso v Assmang Provident Fund and another [2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA) 
Pensions Law Reports

Division: Tribunal of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
Case No: PFA/KN/00029705/2016/MCM
Date: 22/05/2017
Before: MA Lukhaimane, Pension Funds Adjudicator
Keywords


Pension funds — Employee Benefits and Retirement — Pensions — Death benefit — Entitlement of executor of estate of deceased pension fund member to information regarding distribution of benefit — Payment to nominees where member is not survived by any dependants is regulated by section 37C(1)(b) of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956.

Editor’s Summary


The complainant’s brother was a member of the first respondent pension fund at the time of his death in April 2015. On his death, a death benefit became due and payable to the deceased’s beneficiaries.

According to the complainant, he was nominated as the executor of the deceased’s estate. He submitted that he requested the second respondent to provide him with all the details of the deceased’s beneficiaries who had been paid and those who would be paid the death benefit. He requested the information as he had learnt that a benefit was paid to his brother without him or the family being informed about the payment. He further submitted that he tried to obtain the information from the employer and the second respondent, but they failed to assist him. He therefore requested the Tribunal to assist him to obtain the information.

As administrator of the fund, the second respondent submitted that in terms of section 37C of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956, the death benefit did not form part of the deceased’s estate. Furthermore, the complainant was not an identified beneficiary of the deceased. It refused to provide the complainant with the information as doing so would be in violation of the identified beneficiaries’ right to privacy. It submitted that the complainant could request the information in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act 2 of 2000.

Held: Section 7D of the Pension Funds Act requires the board of a fund to ensure that adequate information is provided to members and beneficiaries of the fund. The complainant in the instant matter is the executor of the deceased’s estate, thus, he was neither a member nor a beneficiary.

The fund stated that the complainant was not survived by any dependants and it distributed the death benefit in accordance with the complainant’s nomination form. Section 37C(1)(b) deals with instances where the deceased is not survived by any dependants but has nominated a beneficiary. In the event that a member is not survived by a dependant, his estate might be considered in the distribution of the death benefit. However, the fund must first determine whether there is a shortfall in the estate of the deceased. If there is a shortfall, the board must first pay the shortfall to the estate and the remainder to the nominated beneficiaries in terms of the nomination form. Therefore, although the complainant was not a member or a beneficiary of the fund, as the executor of the  
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 449
deceased’s estate, he was an interested party and entitled to information regarding the death benefit. The fund was obliged to provide the complainant with the information he was requesting.

On the merits, the issue to be determined was whether or not the board of management of the fund failed to carry out its duties in terms of section 37C by failing to pay the outstanding death benefit to the deceased’s nominees. Section 37C places a duty on the board of management to identify the beneficiaries of a deceased member and also vests the board with discretionary powers on the proportions and manner of distributing the proceeds of a death benefit. As with the exercise of any discretionary power, in effecting an equitable distribution the board is required to give proper consideration to relevant factors and exclude irrelevant ones from consideration. As stated above, section 37C(1)(b) deals with payment to nominees where the deceased is not survived by any dependants. Before effecting payment to a nominee, the board must first establish the solvency of the deceased’s estate. In this case, the board did not establish the liquidity of the deceased’s estate before making payment to the nominees. The fund’s allocation of the benefit was set aside and the board was required to properly investigate the matter and identify the deceased’s dependants.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Determination in terms of section 30M of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956 (“the Act”)

[1]   Introduction

The complaint concerns the failure by the first respondent to provide the complainant with details of the payment made to the deceased’s beneficiaries and payment of the outstanding death benefit.
The complaint was received by this Tribunal on 8 December 2016. A letter acknowledging receipt thereof was sent to the complainant on 15 December 2016. On the same date, a copy of the complaint was sent to the respondents giving them until 23 January 2017 to file their responses. A response was received from the second respondent on 9 January 2017. The second respondent made further submissions to this Tribunal on 5 May 2017. No further submissions were received from the parties.
Having considered the written submissions before this Tribunal, it is considered unnecessary to hold a hearing in this matter. As the background facts are known to the parties, only those facts that are pertinent to the issues raised herein will be repeated. The determination and reasons therefor appear below.

[2] Factual background
Mr Ratseko Philimon Mabaso (“the deceased”) was a member of the first respondent by virtue of his employment with Black Rock Mine (Pty) Ltd (“the employer”). The deceased passed away on 18 April 2015. The complainant is the brother of the deceased. Following the death of the deceased, a death benefit became due and payable to the deceased’s beneficiaries.
The second respondent provides administration and consulting services to the first respondent. 
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 450

[3]   Complaint

The complainant submitted that he was nominated as the executor of the deceased’s estate. He submitted that he requested the second respondent to provide him with all the details of the deceased’s beneficiaries who have been paid and those who will be paid the death benefit. He submitted that he requested this information as he has learnt that a benefit was paid to his brother without him or the family being informed about the payment. He further submitted that he tried to obtain this information from the employer and the second respondent, however, they failed to assist him, hence, he requests this Tribunal to assist him to obtain the information. The complainant submitted that as the executor of the deceased’s estate, he believes that he has a right to be issued with the details of the beneficiaries and their payment thereof. The complainant requests this Tribunal to investigate the matter and order the second respondent to provide him with the details of the deceased’s beneficiaries.

[4]   Responses

First and second respondents
The second respondent submitted that the deceased was a member of the first respondent and remained as such until his death on 18 April 2015. It submitted that upon his death, the board of the first respondent conducted an investigation in terms of section 37C of the Act. It submitted that the purpose of section 37C of the Act is to ensure that the dependants of the deceased are provided for and to limit the State’s liability to support such dependants. It further submitted that section 37C of the Act overrides the deceased’s freedom of testation. Furthermore, death benefits are not distributed in terms of the deceased’s wishes, but rather in terms of the discretion of the board.
The second respondent submitted further that section 37C of the Act, specifically excludes the death benefit from the estate of the deceased member. It submitted that the section places a duty on the board to conduct investigations, identify the deceased’s dependants and allocate the benefit to them. Further that, the board is given a wide discretion when allocating the death benefit.
It submitted that the board’s investigation revealed that the deceased had no children and was never married. The board further identified the following as potential beneficiaries of the deceased:
deceased’s brother, Mr Sekhalo Josias Mabaso;
the deceased’s girlfriend, Ms Maebi Selinah Molefe; and
the deceased’s sister-in-law, Mrs Nonsizi Julia Mabaso.
It submitted that the board did not identify the complainant as a potential beneficiary and there was no mention of him during the investigation process. Furthermore, the board proceeded to distribute 50% of the death benefit. The remaining 50% is being retained by the first respondent  
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 451
 should further potential beneficiaries come forward and claim dependency.
The second respondent submitted that for purposes of maintaining confidentiality, the board of the first respondent declined to disclose the details of the identified beneficiaries of the deceased and their allocated benefits to the complainant in order to protect their rights. It submitted that the complainant has not claimed any dependency on the deceased, however, his request for disclosure is based solely on the fact that he is executor of the deceased’s estate and that is the reason he believes he is entitled to the information.
The second respondent submitted that the board of the first respondent is not at liberty to disclose the details of the death benefit distribution, based on the fact that the complainant is the executor of the deceased’s estate and not a beneficiary. It submitted that to do so would be a breach of the right of privacy of the beneficiaries who have been allocated benefits. It submitted further that should the complainant request the details of the death benefit distribution, he is required to make a request in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act 2 of 2000 (“PAIA”).
The second respondent concluded that the board of the first respondent submits that it is necessary to protect the rights of the identified beneficiaries. However, should this Tribunal request a copy of the resolution and the details of the distribution; it will furnish same to it.

Further submissions
On 5 May 2017, the second respondent provided this Tribunal with the board’s resolution, deceased’s beneficiary nomination form, investigation report and the proof of payment to the beneficiaries. In terms of the resolution a death benefit in the amount of R207 507,54 became available for distribution upon the death of the deceased. The board concluded that none of the potential dependants were financially dependent on the deceased and he did not have any children. The board decided to honour the wishes of the deceased and distribute the benefit to his nominated beneficiaries.
The second respondent further provided the deceased’s beneficiary nomination form indicating that the deceased nominated the following persons as his dependants:
Mabaso Sekhalo Josiah – 5%
Molefe Maebi Selinah – 95%

 The first respondent has already paid an amount of R54 737,22 on 22 April 2016 to each of the nominees.

The investigation report of the board of the first respondent contains an affidavit deposed by Maebi Selinah Molefe wherein she states that the deceased cared for her and paid lobola for her. However, they were not civilly married as there is no marriage certificate. This allegation is refuted by the deceased’s brother Sekhalo Josiah in the statement he made to the first respondent attached to the report. 
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 452

[5]   Determination and reasons therefor

Point in limine
The complainant submitted that he is the executor of the deceased’s estate and believes that he is entitled to be provided with the details of the beneficiaries and distribution of the death benefit. The second respondent submitted that in terms of section 37C of the Act, the death benefit does not form part of the deceased’s estate. Furthermore, the complainant is not an identified beneficiary of the deceased. It submitted that it refused to provide the complainant with the information as doing so will be in violation of the identified beneficiaries’ right to privacy. It submitted that the complainant may request the information in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act 2 of 2000.
Section 7D of the Act provides for the duties of the board and subsection (c) reads as follows:

 “7D(1) The duties of the board shall be to – 

 (c) ensure that adequate and appropriate information is communicated to the members and beneficiaries of the fund informing them of their rights, benefits and duties in terms of the rules of the fund, subject to such disclosure requirements as may be prescribed.”

 In turn section 1 of the Act defines disclosure as follows:

“In addition to the meaning of ascribed to ‘disclosure’ in section 1 of the Protected Disclosures Act, includes the disclosure of information – 


(a) regarding any conduct of a pension fund, an administrator or a board member, principal officer, deputy principal officer, valuator, officer or employee of a pension fund or administrator, made by a board member, principal officer, deputy principal officer or valuator, or other officer of employee, of a pension fund or administrator; and
(b) relating to the affairs of the pension fund which may prejudice the fund or its members.”

 Section 7D of the Act requires the board of a fund to ensure that adequate information is provided to members and beneficiaries of the fund. The complainant in the instant matter is the executor of the deceased’s estate, thus, he is neither a member nor a beneficiary as required by the above section. However, it must be noted that the first respondent indicated that its investigation revealed that the complainant was not survived by any dependants and it distributed the death benefit in accordance with the complainant’s nomination form. Section 37C(1)(b) deals with instances where the deceased is not survived by any dependants but has nominated a beneficiary and provides as follows:

  . . . 

“(b) if a fund does not become aware of or cannot trace any dependant of the member within twelve months of the death of the member, and the member has designated in writing to the fund a nominee who is not a dependant of the member, to receive the benefit or such portion of the benefit as is specified by the member in writing to the fund, the benefit or such portion of the benefit shall be paid to such nominee: Provided 

that where the aggregate amount of the debts in the estate of the member exceeds the aggregate amount of the assets in his estate, so much of the benefit as is equal to the difference between such aggregate amount of assets shall be paid into the estate and the balance of such benefit or the balance of such portion of the benefit as specified by the member in writing to the fund shall be paid to the nominee.”

 It is clear from the above section that in the event a member is not survived by a dependant his estate might be considered in the distribution of the death benefit. However, the fund must first determine whether there is a shortfall in the estate of the deceased. If there is a shortfall, the board must first pay the shortfall to the estate and the remainder to the nominated beneficiaries in terms of the nomination form. The first respondent in its determination of the liquidity of the deceased’s estate will have to request such information from the complainant. Therefore, although the complainant is not a member or a beneficiary of the first respondent, he is actually an interested party as the executor of the deceased’s estate. Thus, the complainant is entitled to information regarding the death benefit and the dependants thereof. The, the first respondent is obliged to provide the complainant with the information he is requesting.

Merits
The issues to be determined are whether or not the board of management of the first respondent failed to carry out its duties in terms of section 37C of the Act by failing to pay the outstanding death benefit to the deceased’s nominees.
Section 37C of the Act governs the disposition of death benefits. It places a duty on the board of management to identify the beneficiaries of a deceased member and also vests the board with discretionary powers on the proportions and manner of distributing the proceeds of a death benefit. As with the exercise of any discretionary power, in effecting an equitable distribution the board is required to give proper consideration to relevant factors and exclude irrelevant ones from consideration. The board of management may not unduly fetter its discretion by following a rigid policy that takes no account of the personal circumstances of each beneficiary and of the prevailing situation.
A dependant is defined in section 1 of the Act as follows:

“‘dependant’, in relation to a member, means – 

(a) A person in respect of whom the member is legally liable for maintenance
(b) A person in respect of whom the member is not legally liable for maintenance, if such person –
(i) Was, in the opinion of the board, upon the death of the member in fact dependent on the member for maintenance;
(ii) Is the spouse of the member;
(iii) Is a child of the member, including a posthumous child, an adopted child and a child born out of wedlock.
(c) a person in respect of whom the member would have become legally liable for maintenance, had the member not died.” 
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 454
When making an equitable distribution amongst dependants of the deceased, the board of management has to consider the following factors (see Sithole v ICS Provident Fund and another [2000] 4 BPLR 430 (PFA)):
The age of the dependants
The relationship with the deceased;
The extent of dependency;
The wishes of the deceased placed either in the nomination and/or his last will; and
Financial affairs of the dependants including their future earning capacity potential.
The second respondent submitted that upon the death of the deceased the board of the first respondent carried out an investigation in terms of section 37C of the Act. It submitted that the board identified the persons mentioned in paragraph 4.3 above as potential beneficiaries of the deceased. It provided this Tribunal with the board’s resolution, indicating that a death benefit in the amount of R207 507,54 became available for distribution upon the death of the deceased. Furthermore, the deceased is not survived by any dependants. In terms of the resolution, the board concluded to honour the complainant’s wishes by paying the benefit to his nominated dependants. It submitted that it paid 50% of the benefit to the identified nominees in equal halves and the remainder of the benefit was retained should further beneficiaries come forward and claim dependency. It provided proof of payment in the amount of R54 737,22 each paid to both Maebi Selinah Molefe and Sekhalo Josiah Mabaso. It further provided this Tribunal with a copy of the deceased nomination form.
Section 37C(1)(b) of the Act deals with payment to nominees wherein the deceased is not survived by any dependants as indicated in paragraph 5.2 above. In light of the above provision, a nominee can only receive a portion of the death benefit as is specified by the member in the nomination form. However, before the payment to the nominee, the board must first establish the solvency of the deceased’s estate. Where liabilities of the deceased’s estate exceed its assets then the payment to the nominees must be reduced by the amount of the shortfall of the estate of the deceased.
A proper examination of the board’s resolution indicates that the board has not established the liquidity of the deceased’s estate before payment to both Selinah Molefe and Josiah Mabaso. This is evidenced by the fact that there is no liquidation and distribution account referred to in its resolution. The resolution further indicated that the deceased preferred the benefit to be allocated as reflected in 5.6, being 95% to Selinah Molefe and 5% to Josiah Mabaso, however, the board of management of the first respondent has already paid 25% of the benefit to each of the nominees despite the clear intentions of the deceased as indicated in the nomination form. The board of management of the first respondent deviated from their duties as envisaged in section 37C(1)(b) of the Act. Where a deceased is not survived by any dependant and has nominated a person to  
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 455
 receive a portion of the benefit, the provisions of section 37C(1)(b) of the Act apply. A nominee can only receive a portion of the benefit as is specified by the deceased in the nomination form (see Krishnasamy and others v ABI Provident Fund [2004] 2 BPLR 5471 (PFA).
The first respondent’s investigation report also contains an affidavit deposed by Selinah Molefe, wherein she alleges that she and the deceased have been together for 19 years prior to his death and he cared for her, furthermore he paid lobola for her. Although the allegations of lobola being paid are refuted by the deceased’s brother, there is no indication that the board has investigated the matter further by requesting proof of the said lobola from Selinah Molefe. Furthermore, she also alleged that the deceased was taking care of her for the duration of their relationship; however, the board resolved that she was not dependent on deceased without giving reasons for its decision. It is clear from the above that the board of the first respondent failed to properly investigate and identify the dependants of the deceased as is required by section 37C of the Act. The board must thus, be required to properly investigate the matter and identify the deceased’s dependants.
Section 37C(1)(b) of the Act, sets conditions to be satisfied before a payment to a nominee can be effected. The board of management of the first respondent failed to comply with the conditions as set out in the section and the wishes of the deceased in terms of his nomination form. In the circumstance, the decision of the first respondent’s board to allocate and distribute the death benefit must be set aside and the board must be ordered to investigate and identify possible dependants of the deceased, establish the solvency of the deceased’s estate in the event no dependant is identified and pay the death benefit in accordance with the deceased’s nomination form after payment of the shortfall of the deceased’s estate if any.

[6]   Order

In the result, the order of this Tribunal is as follows:
The decision of the board of the first respondent is hereby set aside;
The first respondent is ordered to investigate and identify the deceased’s dependants based on the concerns raised by this Tribunal, within eight weeks of this determination;
The first respondent is ordered to establish the solvency of the deceased’s estate in the event no dependant is identified, in order to establish if there is any shortfall in the estate, within two weeks of the exercise in paragraph 6.1.2;
Should it be established that the estate of the deceased is insolvent, the first respondent is ordered to pay the shortfall into the deceased’s estate late account, within two weeks of the exercise in 6.1.3;
The first respondent is ordered to pay the death benefit to the deceased’s identified dependants and or nominees in accordance  
[2019] 2 BPLR 448 (PFA)  at 456
  with the provisions of section 37C of the Act, within 12 weeks of this determination; and
The first respondent is ordered to provide the complainant and the deceased’s identified dependants and nominees with a breakdown of their payments made in paragraph 6.1.5 above, within two weeks of such payments.

The following cases were referred to in the above determination:


End of Document