



Rand Water Staff Association obo Snyman / Rand Water [2001] 6 BALR 543 (P)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: AMMSA, Private arbitration
Case No: 000094
Date: 14/04/2001
Before: WJ Hutchinson, Arbitrator
Keywords


Dismissal
Substantive fairness — Making false allegations against colleagues — Dismissal unfair, as employee reported alleged misconduct while under genuine impression that allegations were true.

Editor’s Summary


Relying on hearsay evidence, the grievant, a human resources officer, used the respondent’s “hotline” to report that certain managers and supervisors were paying only a fraction of the rental paid by other employees for accommodation provided by the respondent, and were also receiving other allegedly irregular favours. The grievant’s report was referred to the respondent’s forensic unit, which reported that no irregularities had been found, and recommended that the investigation be terminated. The grievant was dissatisfied and used the “hotline” again, claiming that the forensic unit had not actually visited the houses of the staff concerned. The unit then decided to reopen the investigation, and visited the houses. The managers were annoyed at this invasion of their privacy, and lodged a grievance. When it was learned that the grievant had reported the matter, she was charged with “deliberately giving untrue and misleading information to the Hotline”, with failing to follow company procedures, and with deliberately “belittling and discrediting management and supervisors through malicious and unsubstantiated allegations”. The grievant claimed that her actions had been in accordance with “national policy”, and that she was merely trying to protect the respondent’s interests.

The arbitrator held that the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 was not applicable in casu, as it had been enacted only after the grievant had made her disclosures. However, the rationale behind the respondent’s “hotline” was akin to that of the Act. It required that an informant had a bona fide reason to believe that the information provided was true. There was no immunity for providing information that was known to be false. The grievant had testified that when she compared the house provided for her to that of managers and supervisors, she gained the impression that the latter were favoured. She became more disgruntled when she was required to pay for the maintenance of her property. These perceptions had spurred her to report the matter on the “hotline”. The report had turned out to be untrue, because the managers and supervisors concerned were given discounted accommodation and other perquisites as part of their remuneration, because they were required to live on the respondent’s property. The arbitrator found, however, that the applicant had genuinely believed at the time of making the reports that the managers and supervisors concerned were involved in irregularities, and that the forensic unit was partly responsible for their indignation, because it should not have re-opened the investigation. The applicant’s dismissal was accordingly unfair.

The parties were afforded the opportunity to make representations regarding the quantum of compensation. 

 
[2001] 6 BALR 543 (P) at 544

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation

This is a private arbitration held under the auspices of AMSSA. The arbitration was held on 29 March 2001 at the Rand Water Board’s Head Office. The applicant was represented by Mr A Doogan and the respondent was represented by Ms A Bosch.

Issue to be decided

Whether the dismissal of the applicant was for a fair reason in accordance with a fair procedure.

Background to the dispute

The applicant was employed as a human resources officer. She was a sports co-ordinator and supervisor of the recreation club. The respondent introduced a Hotline whereby aggrieved employees could report irregularities occurring in the workplace to an independent firm namely KPMG Ethics Line.

Relying on hearsay information disseminated by two colleagues of the applicant, she contacted the Hotline on 21 August 2000 to report certain alleged irregularities. It was not seriously disputed that the applicant bona fide believed in the veracity of the information but took no steps to independently ascertain the correctness thereof. 

The applicant reported to the Hotline that, inter alia, certain managers and supervisors paid only 2% of the rental that other employees paid for their housing. Moreover, they were also supplied with cleaning materials, ceiling fans, full carpeting and internal heating. Employees of the respondent worked in their gardens as well, during company time. One of the managers was accused of removing electrical equipment from the respondent’s premises. 

The Hotline referred the report to the respondent’s Forensic Audit Unit to conduct an investigation. Mr A Mavodze of the unit, was mandated to carry out the investigation. In terms of the prevailing protocol, he initially discussed the complaint with the station manager, Mr R Duncan. The latter explained to him that site managers paid nominal rentals because it was a condition of their employment that they must reside on site to deal with any emergencies. As to the allegation that a manager illicitly removed electrical equipment, it was pointed out that the equipment was required to be moved to another site in Bushbuck Ridge. The removal was accordingly authorised. Full time gardeners were provided as part and parcel of the standard terms and conditions of service applicable to managers. Cleaning materials were not provided.

At the conclusion of the meeting with Mr Duncan, Mr Mavodze was satisfied with the explanation and decided that the investigation should be terminated as the allegations were unfounded.

After closing the investigation, Mr Mavodze received a further report from KPMG to the following effect:

“The caller (applicant) is very unhappy and not satisfied with the feedback received. According to the caller the investigators did not actually go to the site to investigate 

 
[2001] 6 BALR 543 (P) at 545

the houses for themselves and has reason to believe that the matter was merely handled over the phone. The caller suggested that a physical inspection be carried out by investigators at the actual site.”


Upon receipt of this report, Mr Mavodze decided to re-open the investigation. To this end, he arranged a physical inspection of the manager’s houses much to the annoyance of the managers concerned. His inspection unearthed nothing new. However, the managers instituted a grievance as they understandably viewed the inspection as an infringement of their privacy. All things consid ered, Mavodze’s actions in this regard are open to criticism since no tangible or new evidence was furnished to him concerning any irregularities. He was under no obligation to conduct a search notwithstanding the applicant’s insistence. I will return to this issue later, however, it suffices at this juncture, to state that the storm which erupted can be directly attributed to the decision to re-open the investigation. On the facts presented, there was no compelling reason to do so. 

The following grievance letter received from the shift manager Mr Dries Strydom pertinently sums up the mood of the affected managers:

“It is with great concern and disappointment that I would like to bring forward the subject concerning the visit to my house by the Forensic Unit today.

The fact that my wife and daughter were at home and had to witness this is to me totally unacceptable.

I see this as a personal matter and an infringement of my privacy as a tenant living on Rand Water property.

. . .

This situation is very demoralising, if this is how Rand Water staff will be treated whenever individuals make slandering attacks, I am sure it will have a more negative than positive impact on Rand Water staff overall.”


Flowing from the grievance instituted by the managers, Mavodze was briefed to ascertain the identity of the caller to the Hotline. He held a discussion with the applicant. The contents of that discussion are in dispute inasmuch as Mavodze alleged that the applicant had initially denied that she was the caller. Little turns on this dispute of fact. It would appear that the parties were at cross purposes. The applicant was under the impression that Mavodze was investigating another matter involving a different issue. The respondent’s insistence in wanting to ascertain the identity of the caller seems to run contrary to the whole policy of maintaining the confidentiality of a complainant.

Upon establishing that the applicant was the caller, Mavodze prepared a report recommending that disciplinary action be taken against her for, “deliberately giving untrue, erroneous or misleading information to the Hotline.”

Acting on this report, the respondent instituted disciplinary action against the applicant. The following charges were preferred against her:

Deliberately giving untrue and misleading information to the Hotline. 
Deliberately giving untrue and misleading information during investigation.
Failure to observe company rules in that the CE’s memorandum regarding the use of the Hotline was contravened.
Deliberate attempt to belittle and discredit Management and Supervisors through malicious and unsubstantiated allegations.” 
[2001] 6 BALR 543 (P) at 546

The “memorandum” referred to in charge 3 dated 26 June 2000 was addressed to “All Staff” and emanated from the Chief Executive. It reads in part as follows:

“For some time Management has become aware that the crime risk in the organisation was increasing. In 1999 approval was granted for the formation of a Forensic Audit Unit with investigative, legal and financial system experience. The unit was formed on 1 October 1999 and has, for the past eight months, been operating from the Rietvlei offices. 

One of the immediate needs identified was the establishment of a confidential Hotline that would allow any staff member, contractor or supplier to provide information to the unit in a secure manner and without exposing such person or persons to any undue pressure.

. . .

Although staff members are urged to assist the Forensic Audit Unit in reducing the crime risk in the organisation, it should be noted that the reporting of information that is known to be false or with the intention of creating malicious misconceptions will be viewed in an extremely serious light.”


The applicant was found guilty of the charges formulated against her and dismissed. An internal appeal was unsuccessful. The procedural fairness of the dismissal was also challenged on a variety of grounds.

The comments of the appeal chairperson are apposite and convey the rationale for upholding the sanction of dismissal. The following paragraphs are of importance:

“The facts of the case are:

TS [applicant] made the calls to the hotline.

Despite TS’s confidence in the reliability of the information conveyed, it was hearsay (or even gossip), at least second hand, and was unsubstantiated.

Little, if any effort was made to validate the information before it was conveyed to the hotline, even in instances where elementary research would have revealed the information as incorrect.

The information, if true would not only have discredited station management, but would probably have resulted in charges being pursued against individual managers.

Determined efforts were made to pursue the issue with the hotline.

. . .

In considering the issue of trust, any employee who embarks upon a crusade to discredit management based on own opinion, hearsay and gossip without sufficient proof, and who remains remorseless and convinced that they are in the right despite evidence to the contrary, cannot expect the trust of that management. If management cannot trust its employee’s not to embark upon subversive activities to undermine them behind their backs, the risk is that managers will spend their time worrying about who is trying to stab them in the back rather than getting on with the job. This situation would be intolerable, and cannot be permitted as it will ultimately destroy the organisation. The Chair believes that Ms Snyman cannot continue to be employed in any position within Rand Water because the relationship of trust has been irretrievably destroyed.” 


Both parties filed written heads of argument at the conclusion of the hearing. Ms Bosch submitted that the applicant embarked upon, “a crusade to discredit management based on her own opinion, hearsay and gossip without sufficient proof and yet stayed convinced that she was in the right despite evidence to the contrary.” Furthermore, it is averred that the trust relationship “has become  
[2001] 6 BALR 543 (P) at 547
completely intolerable and this would make it extremely difficult to work with the applicant again.”

On the other hand, Mr Doogan maintains that the applicant’s actions were, “completely in line with national policy, taking the Protected Disclosures Act into consideration . . . In trying to perform her civil duties as well as trying to protect Rand Water’s interests she was vilified and victimised.”

The Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 (PDA) was enacted to make, “provision for mechanisms or procedures in terms of which employees may, without fear of reprisals, disclose information relating to suspected or alleged criminal or other irregular conduct by their employers whether in the private or public sector.” (See preamble to Act.)

The provisions of the PDA are not applicable to the present dispute since the disclosure was made prior to its enactment. The purpose of the PDA is to protect an employee from being subjected to an “occupational detriment” because the employee made a “protected disclosure.” 

The rationale behind the respondent’s hotline is to afford employees an opportunity to report improprieties in a manner akin to that provided for in the PDA. It is incumbent that the employee bona fide has reason to believe that the information furnished is correct. If the employee knowingly provides false information to discredit the employer or another employee, such conduct would expose the employee to disciplinary action. There is no immunity against intentionally providing false and malicious information against an innocent individual or entity. 

The applicant testified that after joining the respondent, she moved into a house on site. The house was in a “terrible condition” and she gained the impression that her circumstances did not compare favourably with the facilities afforded to managers and certain supervisors. 

The applicant became even more disgruntled when she received news that residents such as herself may be called upon to start paying for the maintenance of their properties. The threat of having to fork out additional money in the face of perceived irregularities, spurred her on to complain to the Hotline. She thought that if these practices could be stopped, the need for residents to contribute towards maintenance costs could be averted. 

I fully endorse the approach that an arbitrator may not second guess an employer’s decision as to what constitutes an appropriate sanction. I am acutely aware that it is not for me to decide upon what the appropriate sanction should be unless I am satisfied that the dismissal was unfair or unreasonable. The causal nexus between the applicant’s report and the manager’s dissatisfaction in respect of having their privacy invaded is tenuous. The forensic unit is to a large measure to blame for the events which unfolded. The investigation should have been terminated at an early stage irrespective of the applicant’s persistence. 

The applicant was entitled to report any perceived irregularities. However, her conduct is open to criticism for relying on untested hearsay evidence. By persisting with the allegations, she acted in a somewhat misguided manner. Nevertheless it could not be disputed that she genuinely believed in what she had reported. In this respect, a finding that the applicant was aware of the falsity of the information cannot be sustained. If anything, she was only guilty of  
[2001] 6 BALR 543 (P) at 548
negligence. It was not an express or implied condition that reports made to the Hotline had to be accurate and capable of objective proof. 

If I am wrong, and the applicant’s conduct had gone beyond that which was envisaged by the creation of the Hotline, a written warning or possibly a final written warning would have been sufficient. In my view, the ultimate sanction of dismissal, under the circumstances outlined above, was not appropriate or reasonable. There was a misdirection in that the applicant was wrongly found guilty of deliberately furnishing false information.

As to procedural fairness, the applicant raised a number of alleged irregularities. I am satisfied that the applicant was given a full and proper hearing. Disciplinary hearings are not to be equated with criminal trials. Consequently, the points raised are wholly without merit.

The applicant does not seek reinstatement. Some responsibility for the dismissal must be attributed to the applicant’s own conduct. She did not apologise for her actions even when it must have become clear to her that she was in the wrong. Due to time constraints, the parties agreed to submit written closing statements. Having received the statements, it is apparent that the issue of compensation has not been fully addressed. The parties may agree to either submit further written statements or have the matter set down again for hearing on the issue of the appropriate relief. 

Award
The dismissal of the applicant was not for a fair reason.
The parties are to address me on the appropriate quantum of compensation, if any to be awarded.

No cases were referred to in the above award.



End of Document