



Soobrathi / SAPS [2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban 
Case No: PSSS 789 / 06 / 07 
Hearing Date(s): 30 / 07 / 2007 
Award Date(s): 12 / 08 / 2007 
Arbitrator: L Williams-De Beer 


Keywords


Labour law — Unfair labour practice — Failure to promote — Arbitration

Mini Summary


The applicant referred a dispute to the bargaining council, alleging that the respondent had committed an unfair labour practice in failing to promote her.

Held that an unfair labour practice refers to any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee relating to grounds which include promotion. A promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds, viz that the procedure was not followed properly, that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides. The applicant's challenge was based on the substantive fairness of the respondent's decision.

The arbitrator found that the respondent had declined to promote the applicant due to her failure to disclose a prior disciplinary record. It had exercised its discretion properly in taking that into account.

The application was dismissed.

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 1

WILLIAMS-DE BEER

Details of hearing and representation

The con-arb took place at the SAPS offices at Servamus Building in Durban on 30 July 2007. The applicant was represented by Mr Haniff from POPCRU and the respondent was represented by Superintendent Sithomo. Neither of the joinder parties attended, although they had been served with the notice of set down. The matter proceeded in their absence.

Issues to be decided

The applicant claimed that the respondent unfairly failed to promote her to a position for which she was suitably qualified.

The issue to be decided was thus whether the respondent's conduct in failing to promote the applicant was unfair and constituted an unfair labour practice.

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 2

Preliminary issues

There was no prospect of resolving the matter and I duly issued the certificate of outcome. A common bundle numbered pages 1–218 was admitted into evidence by the parties.

It was agreed that the only post in dispute was post 1856 and that the applicant's relief was limited to this post.

Background to the dispute

The applicant was employed at HRM Durban north and applied for posts 3416 and 3374 in promotion phase 2 2005/6. In making her application for the posts the applicant had applied for five posts per National Instruction 1/2004 but subsequently realised she didn't want the post at Inanda. Instead, she wanted to apply for the post at Phoenix (3374). She couldn't just add that to her list, as it would have been a contravention of the policy, so she consulted with Captain Donnelly at HRM, who permitted her to withdraw the Inanda application and substitute it with Phoenix. He signed off on her form, even though it was after the closing date, and the applicant believed it was in order.

It was later discovered that Donnelly had not removed the Inanda post and the panel therefore believed she had applied for six posts. As a result, the applicant was disqualified and accused of dishonesty. A departmental investigation was conducted and she was charged for altering the documents even though she acted with the permission of a senior. She was also not given post 3416, even though she was the preferred candidate. The post was later withdrawn.

On 28 November 2005 the applicant was counselled for changing the promotion application form (page 123). She was issued with a "Corrective Counseling" but in terms of regulation 8 the counselling ought not to have been reduced to writing or signed.

During or about 2 June 2006, post 1856 was advertised and the applicant applied. She had been short-listed per part 2 (page 116) and recommended (page 117). The applicant scored 22 along with Gurduth but she was not appointed. The reason was that the panel found that she had not disclosed the corrective counselling received in November in her application. The applicant had not believed it was necessary because she was never charged or put before a disciplinary hearing. Her superior, Moodley, also signed off on her form and didn't mention the counselling. The applicant did not believe she had done anything wrong and further believed the panel erred in taking her counselling into account. It was not formal discipline and, if viewed at the same level as a verbal warning, would have expired after six months anyway. 

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 3

The applicant submitted that Area Commissioner Chiliza obstructed the process and did not want her to be promoted.

The respondent noted that Captain Donnelly denied agreeing to the initial alteration of the documents and in any event had no authority to do that. The National Instruction per clause 15(3) required every application to disclose the full details of any investigation or hearing in the application and non-disclosure could penalise the applicant. The applicant in casu had failed to make disclosure and that was the reason she was disqualified, not because she had a counselling on her record. The panel acted fairly and there had thus been no unfair labour practice.

Survey of the evidence

Applicant

Tasneem Soobrathi confirmed that she received a corrective counselling document but denied it was a serious discipline. Even if it were ranked the same as a first written warning, it would have expired by the time the panel sat in June 2006 and she thus didn't believe it was necessary for her to mention it in her application for post 1856. The applicant noted that the counselling ought not to have been reduced to writing and pointed out that it had never been entered into her SAPS 96. She therefore didn't view it as part of her disciplinary record.

In relation to the counselling itself, the applicant denied that she pressured Donnelly to make the change to her application and insisted she believed she acted with his blessing. Had he told her it could not be done, she would not have made the change and probably would have been awarded the Point post. Losing that post and receiving the counselling was her punishment and she believed she had been severely prejudiced by the counselling being carried over to the next promotion phase and post 1856. The applicant submitted that the area commissioner had her name removed because she was the number one candidate. She believed he wanted to prevent her being promoted.

Gurduth was awarded the post but the applicant was a better candidate. She was a supervisor on level 7 with 16 years service. She worked at the area and district level and had wide experience in all sections of HRM. The applicant did promotions, audited files and managed HRM for the stations. She also provided training on an ongoing basis. Post 1856 required the incumbent to: 

". . . manage and co-ordinate personnel service related matters within the station. Co-ordinate labour and IR issues, promotions, provisioning and maintain statistics."

The applicant was able to perform all those tasks. Gurduth, on the other hand (page 48) worked as an admin clerk in the detective branch. Her experience was in doing registers, handling complaints against members and general enquiries, and supervising clerks on PEP documents. That was  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 4
not in HRM or personnel and the applicant's experience rendered her better qualified. She believed that, but for the corrective counselling issue, she would have been promoted to post 1856 and she asked that I award that promotion to her.

On cross-examination the applicant agreed one was not supposed to change a post after the cut-off date for applications. Her actions had, however, been sanctioned by the commander of the selection and she therefore assumed it was not a problem. She only found out what she had done was wrong when she received the counselling. The applicant denied that Donnelly told her at the time she made the request that it was not permitted. The respondent had also acknowledged Donnelly's role when Chiliza issued his minute at page 124 accepting his part in what transpired.

Superintendent Sithomo put it to her that the National Instruction clause 15(3) required her to disclose any disciplinary action in her application. The applicant agreed but denied that her counselling was viewed as a "pending departmental case" or a "conviction". It was not a disciplinary measure and, in addition, was not pending at the time she applied. Superintendent Sithomo put it to her that the term "conviction" included a counselling or warning but the applicant disagreed. She was referred to the application form (page 97) and the question whether she had been convicted of any criminal or disciplinary offence at that rank or had "undeleted" sanctions. The applicant was of the view that her sanction had been "deleted" and thus that she had no obligation to disclose it. It was in any event not a conviction or misconduct, and was simply a verbal discussion between herself and her commander. She denied that she erred in failing to disclose it.

On re-examination she pointed out that PM Moodley was the head of HRM and he signed off on her application. He was the one who gave her the counselling and ought to have pointed out she erred in not disclosing it.

Mohammed Ismail, a Captain in the SAPS, worked with the applicant for about two years. He was on leave at the time the counselling was issued but didn't believe the applicant was dishonest. He would recommend her for promotion because she was capable and an excellent worker.

Ismail knew and understood the rules of discipline at the SAPS. Clause 15(3) of the National Instruction required a person to disclose convictions and pending cases in a promotion. It didn't prevent a person from applying (page 19 paragraph [4]) or receiving a promotion. A corrective counselling did not have to be reduced to writing and was valid for about six months. Ismail did not believe there was any need to disclose expunged warnings in a promotion.

On cross-examination Ismail denied that he contradicted himself. He agreed that a departmental conviction had to be noted in a promotion application but disputed that it included a verbal warning. PM Moodley  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 5
acted irregularly in reducing the counselling to writing. When referred to the document, he agreed it was an acknowledgement by the applicant of the counselling she had received. It didn't set out what the counselling was for or why it was issued.

Respondent

Dumizweni Johannes Chiliza set out in some detail what had transpired in 2005 when the applicant applied for the post in HRM at Point Police Station. He explained that she had been recommended but, when he presented the recommendations to the provincial head office, they discovered she had never applied for the post and further, that she had made six applications. On his return to the area he asked for an investigation. The applicant admitted to her wrongdoing and the sanction offered was a counselling. PM Moodley conducted the investigation and issued the counselling. A counselling was for less serious offences (page 123) but it was a valid sanction for what she had done.

On cross-examination it was put to Chiliza that the respondent erred in reducing the counselling to writing. He pointed out that the regulations relied on by the applicant were dated 3 July 2006, which was after this incident. He could not be sure what the applicable regulation provided in that regard at the time. Chiliza confirmed that both the applicant and Donnelly were disciplined for their actions by way of a counselling.

Chiliza denied that the applicant was prejudiced in post 1856 because her counselling was taken into account again and noted that clause 15(3) required an applicant to disclose any punishment meted out whilst at their current rank. That applied for anything that occurred whilst at the rank, even if the sanction had expired. A person could be in that rank for 10 years and it meant the entire period was included (page 97). Chiliza couldn't dispute that PPM Moodley had signed off on page 114 but said he was not sure if Moodley acted in terms of the policy. A counselling did have to be disclosed in an application.

Chiliza was referred to his letter dated 16 November 2005 (page 145) and Mr Haniff put it to him that he erred in claiming the applicant wasn't suitable for promotion and that if she were promoted it would "cause unnecessary arbitrations". Chiliza explained that, once he found out about the applicant's dishonesty, he wrote to the area commissioner to request that the post be re-advertised rather than that they appoint a low scoring candidate as that might lead to challenge.

He was not sure who told the promotion panel for post 1856 about the applicant's counselling and denied that he called for her file. He couldn't dispute that the panel initially regarded her as suitable but then changed its mind. Chiliza noted that the panel would have to answer for that. 

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 6

Poolandhran Mogamdery Moodley was the applicant's indirect commander at HRM Durban North. In 2005 the applicant had applied for six posts instead of five in her promotion application and he investigated the allegations against her. Moodley applied the Disciplinary Regulations of 1996 and both the applicant and Donnelly were given corrective counselling. Counselling could be reduced to writing but it was not necessary as long as it was recorded on the employee's conduct sheet and put onto the system.

The applicant subsequently applied for post 1856 but she was disqualified because she didn't disclose the counselling in her record. It was a rule that every misconduct had to be disclosed and the applicant was thus in the wrong. Moodley conceded that her record on the system was clean but said that a number of employees' offences hadn't been captured in the system at that time and they were still catching up.

On cross-examination Moodley stated that the applicant was a dedicated and faithful employee and was suitable for promotion. The counselling he gave her was in terms of the Interim Regulations that operated between 1 September 2005 and 31 August 2006. It was only on 1 September 2006 that the current regulations came into effect. The documents in the bundle were thus not applicable. The extract from the training manual was not approved and likewise not applicable. Moodley explained that a counselling was not the same as a warning and could be reduced to writing or done verbally. A verbal warning was recorded on a conduct sheet in the employee's file. In the new regulations a counselling was valid only for six months.

Moodley was aware the applicant was disqualified for post 1856. He didn't recall Chiliza asking for the applicant's file and the request came to him from the chairperson of the panel. He had signed page 114 which stated that the applicant had no convictions. It was, however, given to him separately from the application form and he had assumed the applicant had disclosed everything. Moodley saw only one page and did not have sight of her application. He did say she was suitable for promotion and there was no need for him to mention the counselling at the point. The National Instruction 1/2004 still permitted an employee with pending cases to be considered for promotion but the applicant was disqualified because she didn't disclose her record, not because she had a record.

It was true that the applicant's offence wasn't on the system but that was because there had been a system error in putting codes onto the system. The respondent had discovered that some sanctions as old as 2001 hadn't been captured and nor had criminal offences. That had nothing to do with the applicant's obligation to disclose her counselling because it was part of her record. Counselling fell under "sanction" in the old regulation 18 and the new regulation 12. It was not a "conviction". If a member refused the counselling, the investigator would be entitled to refer to regulation 12 and proceed with discipline. By accepting the counselling, a person accepted he/she was guilty of wrongdoing and took the sanction.

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 7

Jabulo Falazi Sithole chaired the panel for post 1856. He explained that the panel discovered that the applicant had not disclosed some information in her application. She didn't meet the criteria as a result.

On cross-examination Sithole admitted he had signed the applicant's Part 2 (page 115) and agreed she had "a clean record". At the time, he was aware she had a conviction as it had been mentioned at a management meeting at the time of the incident. He didn't realise it wasn't in her application and that only became clear when the panel compiled their preferred list (page 117). At that point her name was removed and they presented their findings to Chiliza. Sithole confirmed he had made the handwritten note "disclosure?" on the applicant's Part 3.

The applicant and Gurduth had tied on score but they couldn't prefer the applicant because of her non-disclosure. He denied that he had fabricated the reasons for her disqualification because it was on the application form. Sithole explained that the panel didn't have the applicant's disciplinary record before them at he time and they sought advice from HRM. They confirmed the existence of the "corrective counseling" on the applicant's record and concluded that she had erred in not disclosing it. Sithole conceded that PM Moodley issued her a certificate but said it was common practice for commanders to sign that page on its own and without reading the application form.

Vernon Raymond Stokes was on the panel for the Point and Phoenix posts in 2005. He had heard later that the post was withdrawn.

On cross-examination he confirmed the applicant was found suitable for promotion. He wasn't sure why the post was withdrawn but was aware there had been a disciplinary case registered against the applicant for applying for six posts. He was not aware of the letter at page 145. The policy was that anyone could apply for promotion, even if he/she had a disciplinary record. Stokes would not reduce a counselling to writing and would just simply record it in the person's conduct sheet. He confirmed Moodley's evidence that many sanctions had not been put onto the system. It was due to some error in the system itself.

In reply to my question as to how he would handle a non-disclosure case, he said he would investigate and then ask for guidance on dishonesty. There was nothing in the regulations that prevented a person being appointed in the case of non-disclosure. Counselling was a type of sanction and the regulations made it clear that an employee had to admit guilt in order to receive that reduced sanction. Technically that admission of guilt allowed the lesser sanction so it was the same as a sentence.

Sydney Donnelly testified that the applicant approached him after the closing date and asked him to withdraw her application for the Inanda post and apply for Phoenix instead. He told her the system was  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 8
closed and that she had to approach PPO Pillay. The applicant insisted she wanted to change it and said Pillay wouldn't let her. She asked him again and he still objected.

On cross-examination Donnelly denied giving the applicant the documents. He told her to "do what she wanted" because he didn't want to get involved. He had initialled on the long list but that was just to confirm he had counted all the applications and didn't mean he approved her actions. He was counselled for his part because he should not have added her name to the long list. When referred to his affidavit at page 119, Donnelly denied that he gave the applicant the documents.

Summary of the argument

Due to time constraints, it was agreed that the parties would submit written argument on 6 August 2007.

Applicant

Mr Haniff submitted voluminous closing arguments, however, I shall summarise only the most relevant parts herein. He argued that a counselling was not a "sanction" as defined and that it fell under regulation 7 not 8. He also submitted that the applicant was subjected to double jeopardy when the counselling deprived her of post 1856, as it had already resulted in her not getting post 3374 and 3416. Mr Haniff set out details regarding the case of Visagie where she was allowed to make representations as to why her promotion shouldn't be withdrawn and was later promoted. He argued that the respondent was inconsistent. He rejected the evidence of Chiliza and averred that he coached the other witnesses. Mr Haniff likewise rejected the evidence of Moodley, Sithole and Stokes. He averred that they were confused during evidence, particularly Stokes and Sithole, and that their evidence was not reliable. The suggestion was made that Chiliza did not want to promote the applicant, interfered in the process, altered the documents and that he had a grudge against her husband.

Mr Haniff argued at length about post 3374 and 3416 and made numerous averments about my role in this regard. I shall deal with his contentions in this regard in my finding, but suffice it to say that these arguments are new and were not mentioned at the enquiry or put to the respondent. In addition, new documents were submitted with his closing argument that did not form part of the agreed bundle, have not been authenticated and were never put to the witnesses when they testified.

Respondent

Superintendent Sithomo argued that the respondent had acted in compliance with the National Instruction when it disqualified the applicant on grounds of non-disclosure of her disciplinary record. This was in accordance  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 9
with clause 15(3). The applicant was aware of that provision and yet failed to make the disclosure. Chiliza confirmed that and his evidence in that regard was not refuted. The respondent's other witnesses all confirmed the applicant had a duty to disclose her counselling as part of her record and there was thus nothing wrong in the respondent excluding her on that basis. Superintendent Sithomo submitted that there was no unfair labour practice and asked that the application be dismissed with costs.

Analysis of the evidence

In terms of section 186(2) "unfair labour practice" means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee, involving:

unfair conduct by the employer relating to promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
the failure or refusal of an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000) on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act."

The applicant's dispute was lodged in terms of section 186(2)(a) and it is trite law that a promotion can be challenged on any one of three grounds – that the procedure was not followed properly, that there was unfair discrimination in making the appointment or that the employer's conduct, although neither discriminatory nor unprocedural, was "grossly unreasonable" such that it led to an inference of mala fides (see in this regard Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 and Goliath v Medscheme (Pty) Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 760 (IC) [also reported at [1996] 5 BLLR 603 (IC)–Ed]).

The applicant did not challenge her non-promotion on grounds of discrimination and her dispute related primarily to procedural and, to a lesser extent, substantive fairness. The applicant bears the burden of proof in this regard and has to prove, for example, that she was overlooked for an unfair reason; that the respondent failed to adhere to its promotion procedures or policies; that the respondent relied on irrelevant criteria in making the appointment; or that she was a better candidate than the person appointed. It is not, however, sufficient for the applicant only to prove the latter and she must also show that the respondent acted unfairly in so doing (Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd [2001] 8 BALR 834 (CCMA)).

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 10

At the outset I must deal with Mr Haniff's arguments in closing about the posts under review. On 31 January 2007 the applicant lodged a grievance contesting posts 3416, 3374 and 1856. On 6 February 2006, the Step 4 certificate was issued and on 15 February 2007 a referral was made to the SSSBC. The document does not mention which posts were in dispute but at the pre-arbitration meeting on 13 April 2006 the parties listed the facts in dispute as "whether the post was suitably filled by CPO N Sibiya and CPO R Gurdath". I was also requested to decide: 

". . . whether the decisions made by the promotion panel was (sic) procedurally fair in decision making and whether the employer committed unfair labour practice for the non promotion of the applicant."

The pre-arb minute was decidedly ambiguous and I therefore enquired at the outset of the proceedings, which posts were in dispute. I pointed out that although the successful candidates in 3374 and 1856 had been joined, there were no application forms in the bundle for posts 3374 and 3416 and thus no way for the applicant to compare herself to those candidates or prove she was the most suitable. Instead of adjourning to collate those documents, Mr Haniff elected to abandon those claims and proceed on the basis of 1856 only. He noted specifically that regard would be had to 3374 and 3416 by way of background only, particularly as the applicant didn't challenge Sibiya's appointment because of equity. The arbitration duly proceeded on that basis.

It was thus with some surprise that I noted his comments in his closing argument that I had "stopped him" from proceeding on those posts; that condonation was not required and that he wanted his claim to include posts 3374 and 3416. For the reasons stated above, I reject his argument. Haniff was certainly not prevented from running his case as he deemed fit and I only cautioned him about challenging the merits of an appointment without any documentation. Initially I did have some concern about the late challenge to posts 3416 and 3374 but they were included in the Step 4 and thus part of the referral. This was conveyed to the parties during the con-arb process and Haniff nonetheless elected to abandon his claim in that regard. In the premises, my award is restricted to post 1856 as was discussed and agreed on the record at the outset of this arbitration.

I further make note of the fact that Haniff raised a number of issues in his closing argument that were never put to the respondent's witnesses when they testified. He likewise made submissions about a "Consolidation Report" that was not in the bundle and he attached new documents to his argument. None of these documents were part of the agreed bundle nor were they put to the witnesses for comment. I have no knowledge of their authenticity and it appears they were not shown to Sithomo either. In the premises, I cannot rely on these documents in my finding. 

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 11

I turn now to the merits of the matter before me. In order to decide if the respondent committed an unfair labour practice in relation to post 1856, I must assess the competing versions of the parties as well as the documentary evidence before me.

The applicant was a reliable witness and she remained true to her version. She called Mohammed Ismail as her witness but his testimony took the matter little further.

The respondent's case was put forward by Dumizweni Chiliza, PM Moodley, Jabulo Sithole, Vernon Stokes and Sydney Donnelly. That latter two witnesses' evidence was confined to post 3416 and 3374 and is thus of little relevance. Mr Haniff in his closing argument rejected the evidence of Sithole and Moodley on the basis that they were coached by Chiliza, however, that allegation was never put to them, nor was there any evidence to support same. He averred also that Moodley saw the applicant's entire application form before he signed the certificate but that was never put to him; submitted that Chiliza altered the recommended list and made various allegations about the applicant's husband being the reason for the grudge against her, none of which was mentioned in the applicant's evidence or put to the respondent's witnesses. I will concur that there were some inconsistencies in the evidence of Stokes and Sithole but I do not believe they were material nor do they require me to draw an adverse inference on their credibility. It is peculiar to me that Sithole only realised the problem in the final stage but he offered an explanation in that regard and his version was not effectively challenged. In the premises I accept the evidence of the respondent's witnesses.

The facts were, for the most part, common cause and I find the following to have been either proved or not disputed:

• the applicant applied for post 1856;

• she was short-listed for the post;

• she scored 22, the same number of points as the candidate who got the post;

• the applicant was the preferred candidate but was disqualified;

• her disqualification was on the basis that she had failed to disclose her sanction of a "corrective counseling" dated November 2005;

• the panel viewed this as dishonesty and awarded the post to Gurduth;

• the applicant had not made the disclosure on the basis that she didn't believe it was required; and

• the applicant was not offered an opportunity to be heard on the reasons for her non-disclosure.

It was common cause that the policy document governing the posts for which the applicant applied was National Instruction 1/2004 entitled "Promotion of Employees of the Service to Post Levels 2 to 12". The  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 12
relevant clause under scrutiny was clause 15 dealing with "Withdrawal of promotion" and specifically 15(3) but I include also the definition of "suitability" in clause 2(g):

"'suitability' means the suitability of an employee to function effectively at the next highest post level and may be affected by previous findings of misconduct against the employee, previous convictions of the employee or pending investigations into misconduct or criminal offences allegedly committed by the employee."

"15(3)  An employee against whom an investigation (departmental or criminal) is pending, and an employee who has been convicted of any criminal or disciplinary action during her or his service in the present rank, must include full particulars of the investigation(s) or conviction(s) in her or his applications. Failure to disclose this information may result in the withdrawal of the promotion of such employee. The same applies to an employee who provided false information in his or her application."

It was also common cause that mention was made of prior sanctions in the application form itself. The wording thereof is:

"Have you been convicted of any criminal or disciplinary offence(s) during the period of your current rank/post level? (If yes, specify full particulars of all criminal convictions and undeleted disciplinary sanctions.)"

There was some dispute as to which employment regulations applied at the time of the consideration of post 1856 (June 2006). Section 21 of the South African Police Service Discipline Regulations 2006 expressly states that those regulations only come into effect on the date of publication, namely 3 July 2006. The promotion in question was made on 26 June 2006 and thus falls under the previous regulations. The previous SAPS Discipline Regulations were published in Government Gazette 8203 on 31 August 2005 and are fundamentally similar to those in the bundle in relation to the issue of corrective counselling.

I note that regulation 4 sets out various principles underpinning the imposition of discipline and that regulation 4(k) provides that: 

". . . in the event that an employee denies an allegation of less serious misconduct, a formal disciplinary process must be instituted." 

Corrective counselling is found in regulation 8 but falls under regulation 7, namely "less serious misconduct". Regulation 9 deals with verbal warnings and provides that they cannot be reduced to writing, and regulation 15 describes the range of sanctions which are permitted. It includes a counselling, a written warning and a dismissal.

What does appear clear from the evidence and a reading of the relevant regulations and policies, is that the applicant was investigated, was found to have committed a misconduct (albeit a less serious one), accepted her wrongdoing and received a corrective counselling as her sanction.

 
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 13

Mr Haniff made much of the fact that the counselling was reduced to writing, however, I do not believe that has any material bearing on the matter. The Regulations are silent on whether or not it must be reduced to writing and I therefore do not believe the respondent acted wrongly in this regard. It must further be noted that the document was in any event nothing more than an acknowledgement of receipt of the counselling. Finally, I point out that the dispute herein was against the promotion of Gurduth to post 1856 ahead of the applicant and not against the imposition of the counselling as a sanction. Had that been the applicant's case, I might have entertained this aspect but her dispute then would have had to be lodged in terms of section 186(2)(b).

Having accepted that the counselling is deemed a "sanction" by the respondent, the question then arises as to whether or not it ought to have been disclosed by the applicant in her application for promotion. The respondent's witnesses all concurred that she ought to have made the disclosure and Stokes explained that it was deemed to be a "conviction" of sorts because the applicant had to admit guilt in order to receive the lesser sanction of counselling. All of the witnesses were clear on the fact that the existence of the counselling was not the reason she was disqualified and everyone concurred that she was still eligible for promotion. The problem arose because she failed to disclose the sanction in her application and was thus deemed to be dishonest. Chiliza referred to clause 15(3) of the National Instruction which empowered them in such circumstances to withdraw a promotion.

The applicant disagreed and averred that a counselling was not a "sanction" or "conviction", nor did she have any cases pending at the time she applied for the post. She therefore did not deem it necessary to mention the counselling in her application. In support of her argument she pointed out that Moodley had signed her certificate and had not mentioned anything to her. In relation to that point, I note that Moodley's evidence that he didn't see the entire application form was never disputed or challenged. His evidence in that regard must be accepted and I accordingly cannot place any reliance on the applicant's argument in that regard.

In the private sector, a counselling is usually only issued in relation to poor work performance and it is seldom a viable sanction for misconduct. This is not, however, the case in the SAPS, where it is clearly an accepted sanction for less serious misconduct in terms of the Regulations. It must thus be viewed in the same context as any warning or suspension etcetera. It was also Stokes's and Moodley's undisputed evidence that an employee can only be given a counselling as a sanction if he/she admits guilt. In the premises, I can accept as reasonable the respondent's argument that a counselling must thus be disclosed as being a form of "conviction" and sanction.

It must be remembered that the question is not whether or not I would have the same expectations of the applicant as the respondent did, but whether or not the respondent acted unfairly. The applicant bears  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 14
the burden of proof in that regard and I find that she has not discharged it. Although strict, the respondent's interpretation is not unreasonable. Clause 15(3) does vest the respondent with a discretion to withdraw promotion from an applicant who does not make a full disclosure and it exercised its right in that regard in casu. Chiliza and Sithole testified that they found the applicant to have been dishonest and I am not in a position to refute that. It would furthermore constitute a valid basis for the applicant to be excluded from the promotion.

Where the respondent erred, in my view, was in the fact that they exercised that discretion without application of the audi alterem partem principle. Strangely this was never argued by the applicant despite Mr Haniff's reference to the case of Visagie. No evidence was led about her case but it appears from the documents that Visagie was disqualified from promotion because she failed to make disclosure of a pending criminal case. It would thus appear that the respondent does apply this "non-disclosure" rule but in Visagie's case she was at least permitted to make representations before it was implemented. The applicant was not offered this opportunity (wrongly in my view) and, had Mr Haniff argued this point, it might well have led to a finding of procedural unfairness. In the absence of any evidence or argument in this regard, however, my comments in this regard remain obiter only.

The applicant also challenged substantive fairness and alleged she should have been appointed to the post. She compared herself very briefly to Gurduth and averred that she was a more experienced candidate. Her evidence in that regard was not challenged, nor did the respondent call any witnesses to attest to the fact that Gurduth was a superior candidate. Indeed, it would appear to be common cause that, but for the non-disclosure issue, the applicant would have been the preferred candidate for the post.

John Grogan in the matter of Cullen / Distell (Pty) Ltd 2001 CCMA stated that the relative strengths and weaknesses of the candidates could not in themselves prove that the employer committed an unfair labour practice. He noted that commissioners were not intended to take on the role of recruitment agencies and said it was not their function to assess which candidate was best, but rather to ensure that the employer acted fairly in making its selection. The inferiority of the successful candidate was, he found, only relevant if it indicated that a superior candidate was overlooked for some unacceptable reason. This was view was endorsed by the Labour Court in Ndlovu v CCMA & others (2000) 21 ILJ 1653 (LC) [also reported at [2000] JOL 6428 (LC)–Ed], wherein the court held that it was not sufficient for a complainant to say that he or she was qualified by experience, ability or formal education but rather that the employer's decision to appoint someone else was unfair.

In Herbert v Department of Home Affairs 1998 KN 10413 the issue was whether the respondent's conduct in not promoting the applicant to the position of assistant director amounted to an unfair labour practice. The commissioner assessed the facts and stated that the decision to promote an employee falls within the  
[2007] JOL 20625 (SSSBC) at 15
prerogative of management. He disagreed with the decision of George v Liberty Life Association of Africa Ltd (1996) 17 ILJ 571 (IC) but supported the finding in Goliath v Medscheme (supra) wherein the court said that, where discrimination is not alleged, the applicant had to show "gross unreasonableness such that would lead to an inference of mala fides" before he could succeed with an unfair labour practice claim.

In casu, it could not be disputed that the respondent exercised its discretion to disqualify the applicant from post 1856 on grounds that she didn't disclose her prior disciplinary record. As stated, I am inclined to view the respondent's interpretation of the regulations and their decision as quite strict but there is insufficient evidence before me to show it was "grossly unreasonable" or "mala fides". I thus cannot see any basis for overruling the respondent's decision and, as much as I empathise with the applicant and believe she did not act with any malice or intent in not disclosing the counselling, I do not believe it committed an unfair labour practice by failing to promote her.

Superintendent Sithomo requested costs in his closing argument but did not motivate his request at all. Having regard to the SSSBC Dispute Procedure in this regard, I do not believe a costs order would be warranted in casu in any event.

Award

The application is dismissed with no order as to costs.

Appearance:
Mr Haniff, Police & Prisons Civil Rights Union (At); Superintendent Sithomo (R)


End of Document