



Mangena v Workforce Group Provident Fund and another [2025] 1 BPLR 8 (PFA)
Pensions Law Reports

Division: Tribunal of the Pension Funds Adjudicator
Case No: PFA/GP/00109591/2024/MM
Date: 29/11/2024
Before: N Essop, Deputy Pension Funds Adjudicator
Keywords


Employee Benefits and Retirement — Pension benefit — Withdrawal benefit — Failure to pay — Employer’s request to withhold benefit.

Editor’s Summary


The complainant was employed with the second respondent from 1 March 2009 until 31 October 2023 and was a member of the first respondent pension fund during that time. On his exit from employment, the complainant became entitled to receive a withdrawal benefit. He was not paid his benefit as the fund withheld the benefit at the instance of the employer pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956. Its decision was based on allegations of misconduct by the complainant in that he had acted in breach of contract and caused damage to the employer in the amount of R5 555 910.

The employer had accused the complainant of fraud. According to the complainant, the employer had failed to charge him formally or to serve any summons to appear in court regarding the allegations. The Adjudicator’s assistance was sought.

Held that the issue for determination was whether the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit was consistent with section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act and therefore lawful.

As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable, or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Act. The relevant section of the Act in this complaint was section 37D(1)(b). On a plain reading of the provision, section 37D(1)(b)(ii) does not authorise the withholding of a member’s benefit where he is potentially liable for theft, fraud, or misconduct against the employer. However, case law establishes that it is permissible for a board of a fund to withhold a benefit in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act to protect the employer’s interests. The fund was required to balance the competing interests of the employer and the member; and have regard to the strength of the employer’s case. The fund could not have done either of the aforementioned without properly hearing from the member. The evidence indicated that the complainant was given an opportunity to make representations and place his case before the fund prior to the board agreeing to withhold his benefit. The fund had complied with its duties and had to continue to monitor the progress of the legal proceedings against the complainant to ensure that they were not unduly delayed as a result of the employer’s conduct.

The complaint was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Essop:

Determination in terms of section 30M of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956 (“the Act”).

[1]    Introduction

This complaint concerns the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit by the fund at the request of the employer pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.
The complaint was received by the Adjudicator on 29 February 2024. On 2 April 2024, further particulars were requested from the complainant. On the same date, further particulars were received from the complainant. On 23 April 2024, a notification of the complaint was sent to the complainant informing him that the matter had been referred to the respondents for possible resolution. Furthermore, letters were sent to the respondents informing them about the complaint and giving them until 22 May 2024 to resolve the complaint directly with the complainant. On 21 May 2024, a response was received from the employer. On 30 May 2024, the complaint was formally registered, and an acknowledgment letter was sent to the complainant. On the same day, the complaint was sent to the respondents, requesting their responses by 19 June 2024. On 19 June 2024, the fund requested an extension until 28 June 2024, which was granted. On 20 June 2024, the employer’s response was forwarded to the fund for a reply by 5 July 2024. On 1 July 2024, a reply was received from the complainant. On 17 July 2024, a response was received from the fund. On 18 July 2024, the fund’s response was forwarded to the complainant for a reply by 1 August 2024. On 22 July 2024, the fund’s response was forwarded to the employer for a reply by 5 August 2024. On 29 July 2024, a reply was received from the fund. On 30 July 2024, a reply was received from the complainant. On 21 November 2024, further submissions were received from the Employer. No further submissions were received from the parties. 
After reviewing the written submissions before the Adjudicator, it is considered unnecessary to hold a hearing in this matter. The determination and reasons therefor appear below.

[2]    Factual Background

The complainant was employed from 01 March 2009 until 31 October 2023. He was a member of the fund under the participation of the employer.
Following his exit from service, the complainant became entitled to receive a withdrawal benefit. The fund decided to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefit at the instance of the employer pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act. This is based on allegations of misconduct by the complainant in that he acted in breach of contract and caused damage to the employer in the amount of R5 555 910.00.

[3]    Complaint.

The complainant submitted that he applied for his withdrawal benefit after resigning from the employer on 31 October 2023. The complainant submitted that the HR advised him that it will not be processing any withdrawal because the employer is charging him with fraud.
The complainant submitted that he was suspended with full pay on 7 August 2023 by the employer on fraud allegations. The employer failed to set up a disciplinary hearing but instead withheld. his salary. The complainant submitted that he could no longer pay for any of his [obligations]. He submitted that, on 2 October 2023, he resigned from employment.
The complainant submitted that the employer had failed to charge him formally or get any summons to appear in any court regarding the allegations. The complainant submitted that they took the employer to the CCMA for constructive dismissal, where the employer continued to frustrate the process with requests for postponement when dates for hearings have been set.
The complainant attached a sequence of events as follows:

 • On 4 August 2023, Mr Jonathan Kruger accompanied by Rudi from IT came to my office and requested my laptop. No explanation was given until the 6th when he was advised by Mr. Jonathan Kruger that a whistle-blower raised allegations of fraud against him.

 • On 07 August 2023, Mr. Kruger (Managing Director) requested that he do a polygraph test by way of a WhatsApp message. He immediately requested a formal letter on company letterhead as specified in the company policy and procedures. Mr. Kruger responded that there was no formal letter and that he should just attend. This exchange of communication is a matter of record.

 • On the same day, he received an unsigned letter requesting him to avail himself for a Polygraph test. This letter contained no date, time or venue for the Polygraph test.

 • He immediately requested a copy of his employment contract to be able to respond to the request since there was a reference to it in the said letter.

 • On 08 August 2023, before he could be provided with a copy of the contract, he was summoned to a meeting by Mr Kruger wherein he was served with a letter of suspension. The letter of suspension was issued on 07 August 2023 and he received it on 8 August respectively.

 • On 14 August 2023, he was served with Disciplinary Charges, and a hearing date was set for 16 August 2023. The employer had concluded its investigations and was ready to proceed with the hearing.

 • On 23 August 2023, he received yet another threatening letter from Hunts attorneys, this time with unfounded claims that he was contacting employees at Workforce, which he had not done at all.

 • The DC was [scheduled] to be at the offices of Hunts Attorneys; whom [original text not clear – Ed.] questioned [regarding] impartiality in the matter.

 • He submitted a request for further documents/information to Lungile Luthuli (IR Manager) on 14 August 2023. This led to the indefinite postponement of the DC until 10 October 2024, when he received notification that a new date had been set for 19 October 2023.

 • On the 21 August 2023, a letter dated the 18th of August 2023 was sent to him. The letter’s content was to inform him of a breach of contract for failure/refusal to attend a Polygraph Test. Once again, this letter did not contain a date, time, or venue for the Polygraph testing. The letter also informed him that the charges would be amended due to new evidence that had come to the attention of the employer.

 • On 22 August 2023, he was contacted by Captain Kuboni, who advised that a criminal case CAS no. 266/08/2023 was opened at the Hillbrow Police Station by the employer; nonetheless, he was never summoned to make a statement. This turned out to be a notification.

 • A letter from the employer dated 28 August 2023 was sent to him. This was the first time that a formal request contained a date, time, and venue for the polygraph test, and he duly attended the polygraph test on 31 August 2023. The test is a process driven by the employer.

 • The employer failed to pay his salary for the months of August, September, and October, as well as the commission earned for July. In light of this, he tendered his resignation immediately on 2 October, which the employer refused to accept, demanding that he serve notice until 31 October.

 • He enquired if this notice period would be paid as per the conditions of his suspension, and the employer failed to confirm such to be the case but instead forced him to avail himself for a hearing.

 • He wrote to the employer advising that he cannot serve unpaid notice and that without any commitment from them, his resignation should be enforced. Lungelo Luthuli, duly appointed by the employer, acknowledged his resignation via email.

The complainant requests the Adjudicator to investigate the matter and order the payment of his withdrawal benefit.

[4]    Responses

Fund

The fund [submitted] that, on 31 October 2023, it received an instruction from the employer to withhold the complainant’s benefit as there is a [pending] fraud case investigation. The complainant sent an email to HR on 1 November 2023 to request that the employer submit his withdrawal claim and was advised that due to the pending case the withdrawal form will not be processed until investigations are finalised.
On 19 December 2023, the complainant wrote to the fund to apply for withdrawal of his benefit as the employer refused to send through his withdrawal form. On 20 December 2023, the fund requested the employer to provide the following:

 • Proof (prima facie evidence) from the employer of the theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct by the member as well as details of the potential harm to the employer if the member’s benefit were not withheld but rather paid out in full. This should be used to assess the strength of the case against the member.

 • Proof that the employer has instituted a civil case against the member or has obtained an interdict preventing payment of a benefit.

The fund submitted that these requirements have been confirmed by the Adjudicator. The fund submitted that its preference for the institution of civil proceedings over criminal proceedings (including obtaining a compensatory order as explained above) is due to various challenges associated with the latter, for example, the length of criminal investigations and the Director of Public Prosecution’s decision whether to prosecute or not.
The potential delays waiting for a criminal conviction lead to the risk that the PFA issues a determination requiring that the benefit be paid to the member because a compensatory order ruling has not yet been secured and a civil case has not been instituted by the employer.
The fund submitted that the employer then requested that its attorneys ([Hunts Attorneys]) furnish the fund with the case [original text not clear – Ed.] which were [original text not clear – Ed.] on 8 February 2024 and confirmation of [original text not clear – Ed.]. In addition, it engaged with the complainant on these allegations and his current financial circumstances.
The fund submitted that for the above reasons and responses received by either party, the fund believes it has the circumstances to continue withholding the complainant’s benefit.

Employer response

The employer submitted that on or about 26 July 2023, it received a whistle-blower call from an anonymous source alleging that fraudulent activity was currently occurring within the employer’s offices. This call implicated numerous individuals. Amongst the implicated was the complainant who had been the head of a particular department of the employer’s for numerous years.
The employer submitted that the fraud that was detailed in the abovementioned whistle blower call surrounded events spanning numerous years which included but is not limited to the orchestrating of submitting of fraudulent invoices from inactive alternatively fictitious service providers for payment to a bank account linked through affiliation to the complainant.
The employer submitted that upon the company’s internal investigations, as the complainant was a respected executive of the employer, it was found that approximately R5.5 million was defrauded from the company by the complainant and his fellow employee accomplices. Due to the complainant’s position as Managing Director, he was able to bypass company policies to ensure the fictitious invoices were paid without any supporting documentation presented for work done.
The employer submitted that a detailed spreadsheet of all the monies paid to the fictitious service providers and a witness conversation materially implicating the accused in [receiving] monies from these transactions can be provided to the Adjudicator should further substantiation of the above allegations be required.
The employer submitted that on or about 8 August 2023, due to the aforementioned, the complainant was suspended and subsequently requested to attend a polygraph test. The complainant refused to attend the polygraph test scheduled for the week of 8 - 11 August 2023. A second polygraph test was scheduled for 31 August 2023 when the complainant said he was available for same, yet again the complainant, on the day in question, did not participate in the test.
The employer submitted that on or about early September 2023, a criminal complaint was opened at SAPS Hillbrow against the complainant and others for their involvement in defrauding the company.
On 2 October 2023, the complainant resigned with immediate effect. The company informed the complainant that they do not accept his resignation, as they view it as an attempt to evade the impending disciplinary hearing and avoid answering for his involvement in the fraud. The employer then proceeded to set numerous dates for the complaint’s disciplinary hearing to be held, which the complainant refused to attend since the outcome of the hearing would not be on his terms, which was for the employer to pay the complainant his outstanding salary plus ancillary benefits.
The employer submitted that numerous attempts at a fair approach to discipline the complainant were [made] by the employer, but it was, in fact, the complainant who frustrated this process and not the employer. The complainant ensured that this internal procedure would not occur.
The employer submitted that the complainant then referred a constructive dismissal referral [to the CCMA] against the employer. Due to no fault of the employer but to the sparse availability of commissioners to adjudicate over the matter as well as dilatory tactics exercised by the complainant, the CCMA matter was concluded much later than the employer would have preferred.
The employer submitted that during this referral the employer took the opportunity to advise the complainant that they were fully aware of his fraudulent activities within the company. The complainant did not admit nor deny same but was poor in refuting the claims against him and as such the commissioner did not find in favour of the complainant in the aforementioned referral.
The employer submitted that in light of the above and under the complainant’s own admission to the Adjudicator in his compliant, his finances are depleted. The complainant further owns no immovable property, and he is thus currently a man of straw and a flight risk as he is a foreign national. It is strikingly clear from the evidence that the employer has collected against the complainant, that the complainant together with his other co-accused are guilty of defrauding the company of an excess of R5 500 000.
The employer submitted that it is currently engaged in criminal and High Court civil proceedings against the complainant and his co­ accused. The employer submitted that it implores the Adjudicator to take into cognizance the criminal offence and deprivation that the complainant has committed against the employer and to grant the employer an extension to withhold the provident fund proceeds of the complainant only until such time that the civil proceedings against the complainant are [finalized] and judgment is rendered.
The employer submitted that should the Adjudicator not grant the employer this [original text not clear – Ed.] could obtain justice and reprieve for itself, the employer would lose the only means by which the company can reclaim some of the frauded funds that the-complainant and his co-accused deprived the employer of over the course of numerous years.
The employer submitted that it beseeches the Adjudicator to take the above into their cognizance and not to allow the mal-administration of justice to occur under its watch as the employer has already had to endure massive financial loss due to the criminal activity of the complainant and as such have also had to retrench long standing staff members due to the financial impact of the crime orchestrated by the complainant against the employer.
The employer submitted that it trusts that the Adjudicator believes in substantive justice and accountability for ones’ actions and will not deprive the employer of its only remaining route of recourse as it has already been burdened by debilitating deprivation at the hands of the complainant.

Complainant’s reply

The complainant submitted that the employer, in its reply, claimed that he was delaying processes. However, the letter from the fund will show that such allegations were not true. The fund wrote to the employer on 20 December 2023 requesting documents or directives from the courts, which gave them the right to withhold his provident fund.
The complainant submitted that the employer failed to respond with any documents or directives until 8 February 2024 more than 60 days since the request was made. Even then there was no directive, the complainant submitted that the employer instituted legal action against him and other parties in August 2023, and when they saw that they might not [get] favourable feedback from the criminal [charges] they decided to pursue civil action only after being advised by the fund.
The complainant submitted that it is evident that the employer had no intention of pursuing civil action until they were advised to do so by the fund. They saw in it a quick window of opportunity to unjustly halt his benefits. There’s no guarantee that the civil claim will hold water; essentially, they are trying to prove criminality in the civil courts.
The complainant submitted that, in the meantime, he would have suffered irreparable harm as a result of malicious intent. Had they had such intentions it is difficult to understand why they waited half a year to file a civil suit against him. The complainant submitted that it is, therefore, clear that the employer will use any means necessary to delay or stop any payment due to him. They already withheld his salary unjustly so, including performance commission, having disguised it as a change in systems.
The complainant submitted that without going into the merits of the case, the cause of action in the civil case is based on allegations of fraud. In contrast, the employer has no intention of pursuing that same charge in the criminal court. Besides, the employer needs a court order to withhold the benefits, not the issuing of the summons. Hence, this will allow any employer with malicious intent to literally issue a civil process that has no prospects of success.
The complainant submitted that this case should remind companies that they are not allowed to bully employees using their financial resources. Companies should, by precedence, respect the policies and procedures they set up within their organisations and should not be allowed to disregard them just to exploit helpless employees.
The complainant submitted that the employer cannot base amounts on un-proven allegations by senior managers [with personal] vendettas against employees disguised as whistle-blowers. The complainant [submitted] that it is clear and apparent that [the company] intends to suffocate him financially and ensure that he cannot have another source of income for his family.
The complainant submitted that it would be a welcome relief if the Adjudicator provided him with the relief sought and granted him access to his provident fund, the total amount of which he also disputes as he believes it should be far higher than the R547 000.00 communicated by the fund.

Employer’s further submissions

The employer provided a copy of the summons and particulars of claim. It indicted that the criminal matter has been opened at Hillbrow police station under case no: 266/8/2023. The matter has subsequently been handed over by the Hillbrow Station Commander/Detective to the Hawks Commercial Crimes Unit and moved to the Commercial Crimes Unit. The Hawks allocated this case to Captain Lawrence Khubone.
The employer submitted that it is in the process of finalising a supplementary criminal affidavit after the conclusion of internal investigations. This affidavit will also contain an additional claim against the complainant to the value of R4 418 859.39, bringing the total claim against the complainant to a sum of R9 873 319.39.
The employer submitted that a further civil case will also be instituted against the complainant shortly, for the [sum] of R4 418 859.30. The employer submitted that the [supplementary] criminal papers are anticipated to be finalised and filed in the 1st week of December 2024, after which the Investigating [Officer will] be able to advise the Adjudicator on the status of the matter.

[5]    Determination and reasons therefor

Introduction

The issue that falls for determination is whether or not the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit is consistent with section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act and therefore lawful.
As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable, or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Act. The relevant section of the Act in this complaint is section 37D(1)(b), specifically sub-section (ii) thereof which provides that:

“37D(1) A registered fund may -

 (a) . . .

 (b) deduct any amount due by a member to the member’s employer on the date of retirement, the date on which the member ceases to be a member of the fund or the date on which the member’s employment with a participating employer in a retirement fund is terminated in accordance with the Income Tax Act and the Tax Administration Act, 2011 (Act No. 28 of 2011), in respect of compensation, including any legal costs recoverable from the member in a matter contemplated in subparagraph (ii), in respect of any damage caused to the employer by reason of any theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct by the member, and in respect of which -

 (i) the member has in writing admitted liability to the employer; or

 (ii) judgment has been obtained against the member in any court, including a magistrate’s court, and includes a compensation order granted in terms of section 300 of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No. 51 of 1977), from any benefit payable in respect of the member or a beneficiary in terms of the rules of the fund, and pay that amount to the employer concerned;”

On a plain reading of the provision, section 37D(1)(b)(ii) does not authorize the withholding of a member’s benefit where he/she is potentially liable for theft, fraud, or misconduct against the employer. However, in the case of Highveld Steel and Vanadium Corporation Ltd v Oosthuizen [2009] 1 BPLR 1 (SCA), where the Supreme Court of Appeal (“SCA”) held at paragraph [19] that:

“Such an interpretation would render the protection afforded to the employer by section 37D(1)(b) meaningless, a result which plainly cannot have been intended by the Legislature. It seems to me that to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording must be interpreted purposively to include the power to withhold payment of a member’s pension benefits pending the determination or acknowledgement of such member’s liability. The Funds therefore had the discretion to withhold payment of the Respondent’s pension benefit in the circumstances.”

In Appana v Kelvinator Group Services of SA Provident Fund [2000] 2 BPLR 126 (PFA) at page 129, this Tribunal held:

“The purposive approach requires the interpreter to attach a meaning to the words which will promote the aim of the provision. Or to put it differently the purpose of the legislation must be determined and then given effect to.

The purpose of rule 8.2.1.4 and section 37D(b), as stated, is to protect the employer’s patrimony from diminution by member misconduct and to allow an appropriate set-off against the pension benefits. Thus in order to give effect to the purpose of rule 8.2.1.4, we must extend the textual meaning of the words to include not only a power to deduct but also the power to withhold a benefit pending the determination of liability.

An interpretation of rule 8.2.1.4 along these lines is essentially an application of the ex accessorio eius, de quo verba loquuntur maxim applied by our courts usually in respect of enabling legislation. The maxim provides that if a statutory provision confers a power, it also by implication confers those powers reasonably necessary to achieve the principal aim.”

 It is accordingly permissible for a board of a fund to withhold a benefit in pursuance of a claim in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.

Duties of the board

At paragraph [20], the SCA in Highveld went on to state:

“Considering the potential prejudice to an employee who may urgently need to access his pension benefits and who is in due course found innocent, it is necessary that pension funds exercise their discretion with care and in the process balance the competing interests with due regard to the strength of the employer’s claim. They may also impose conditions on employees to do justice to the case.”

In terms of the Highveld decision, the fund was required to:
balance the competing interests of the employer and the member; and
have due regard to the strength of the employer’s case.

 The fund could not have done either of the aforementioned without properly hearing from the member about:

What prejudice will the member suffer if the benefit is withheld; and
What response did the member have to the employer’s case.
The complainant tendered his resignation with immediate effect on 2 October 2023. His withdrawal benefit became payable following [his] exit [from service]. The complainant is accused of [original text not clear – Ed.] in that he registered fraudulent suppliers, issued and approved fraudulent [notices] payment by the employer. This resulted in [the employer] suffering a loss in the amount of R5 555 910.00.
On 31 October 2023, the employer requested the fund to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefit. The fund submitted that, on 20 December 2024, it requested the complainant’s views on the matter. The complainant responded, denying all the allegations against him and maintaining his innocence in the matter.
The employer provided the fund with a copy of the summons issued in the High Court of South Africa, Gauteng Local Division, Johannesburg, under case number 2024-008472.
The duty of the Adjudicator in this matter is to consider whether the board of the fund correctly exercised its discretion with care and, in the process, balanced the competing interests with due regard to the strength of the employer’s claim. As held in SA Metal Group (Ply) Ltd v Deon Jeftha and 2 Others Case [2020] 1 BPLR 20 (WCC) (“Jeftha”), the Adjudicator is called upon to determine whether or not the fund’s decision had been justified at the time when the decision was taken.
In the Jeftha decision, it was held that the duties placed on a board in terms of section 7C envisage careful scrutiny of claims made against benefits by employers and a weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording the member an opportunity to place his case properly before the fund. The failure of the fund to comply with its duties constitutes an inability by the board of the fund to comply with its legally prescribed fiduciary duties.
On 20 December 2023, the allegations [against the] complainant were put to him by the fund, and the latter [responded] by denying all the allegations against him and maintaining his innocence in the matter. Therefore, the complainant was afforded [an opportunity] to place his case before the fund. However, his response simply amounted to a [bare] denial. He does not answer the allegation [in any] substance.
With regard to a criminal matter, it should be noted that, in DSV Flexi Retirement Fund (Pension Section) v Pillay and Others PFA 62/2020, it was held that criminal proceedings on their own are not sufficient to justify the withholding of a member’s benefit. The Financial Services Tribunal (“FST’) also relied on the latter decision in the matter of Ithuba Holdings (RF) (Pty) Ltd v Pillay and Others PFA 60/2021 confirming its previous decision. In the matter of Fundsatwork Umbrella Provident Fund v Ngobeni and Another PFA 64/2020 the Tribunal held that a fund is not entitled to withhold payment because a criminal case has been opened or even upon conviction. A conviction is not a judgment against a member that quantifies compensation in respect of damages caused, and costs are not awarded against persons convicted. The latter was also confirmed in the matter of Fundsatwork Umbrella Pension Fund v Matjiane and Others PFA 39/2020. Thus, a criminal case may lead or may not lead to a conviction.
However, the facts indicate that the employer also instituted civil proceedings against the complainant. In terms of section 7C(2)(f) of the Act, the fund owed the complainant a fiduciary duty in respect of his accrued benefit. The employer took steps immediately regarding the complainant’s alleged misconduct as it lodged a criminal complaint against him under 266/8/2023. In addition, the employer also subsequently instituted a civil claim against the complainant and others. The board balanced the competing interests before arriving at its decision to withhold. Its initial decision was provisional pending the submission of all relevant information in support thereof, which is permissible.
Further, the complainant has a fund credit of R547 000.00, which is less than the amount claimed by [the employer]. The evidence indicates that the complainant was provided an opportunity to make representations and place his [case before] the fund prior to [the] board agreeing to withhold his benefit at the behest of the employer. However, the complainant did not provide any evidence to gainsay the employer’s case. The evidence submitted by the employer is compelling.
The submissions before the Adjudicator indicate that the fund complied with its duties to justify the withholding of the complainant’s benefit pursuant to section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act. The fund must continue to monitor the progress of the legal proceedings against the complainant to ensure that they are not unduly delayed as a result of the employer’s conduct.
According, the complaint cannot be sustained and falls to be dismissed.

[6]    Order

The complaint is dismissed.


End of Document