



Naidoo / MTN (Pty) Ltd [2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAJB17783-17
Date: 19/03/2018
Before: E Myhill, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practice — Demotion — Employee transferred without prior consultation from branch at which he worked to another in same area and losing commission in consequence — Transfer constituting unfair demotion.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a store supervisor, was transferred from the branch at which he had worked for some time to another branch in the same city, resulting in a drop in his commission. He claimed that this amounted to an unfair demotion. The respondent contended that the transfer was a purely operational decision, and that the claim did not fall within the scope of the definition of “unfair labour practice” because it related to remuneration.

The Commissioner noted that the applicant had not been consulted about the decision to transfer him. This was unfair in itself, and entitled the applicant to compensation. His loss flowed from his demotion, not from being deprived of a benefit. Although the applicant’s contract expressly provided for transfer at the employer’s instance within areas, he was given the opportunity to meet targets which affected his commission. Although the applicant retained his job title and function, he had been moved because the respondent had lost confidence in the management of the branch from which he had been transferred. The applicant had, accordingly, proved that he had been subjected to an unfair labour practice.

The applicant was awarded compensation equal to the amount he had earned, with commission, at the store from which he was transferred.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
On 22 January 2018 the applicant was represented by Mr Rothmann, an attorney, and the respondent was represented by Mr S Tom, an attorney. The matter could not be completed and was rescheduled to continue on 2 March 2018 when it was completed. The parties agreed to submit closing arguments by 9 March 2018 which I received. 
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 740

Issues to be decided
Whether the respondent committed an unfair labour practice by transferring him from his position as Store Supervisor at its branch at Morningside to Store Supervisor at its branch at Rosebank and, if so, what remedy would be appropriate. 

Applicant’s case
Dhireshan Naidoo stated that he was appointed by the respondent as a Customer Service Representative on 17 October 2008 (page 7 of “A”). He was initially based at Midrand and he then applied for a position as Store Supervisor at Balfour Park. He was promoted to Store Supervisor on 1 September 2010. He received two awards for Outstanding Compliance (ie he was the best supervisor in this field in Gauteng for two years in a row). During 2013, he was approached by Mr Herbert Monadira (Regional Manager of Gauteng 1) and Mr Maladzi Makoshi (HR Partner) and asked how he felt about moving to the Morningside branch based on his performance at Balfour Park. He said he would think about it and later agreed to this after they introduced a commission structure. This made the potential for earnings at the Morningside branch the highest in SA because it had the highest number of customers and 30 sales consultants reported to him. He moved to Morningside in December 2013.
There were three Store Supervisors at Morningside – himself, Gavin Goncalves and Pinda Mankga. The store had to make 95% of its target to qualify for commission. This was achieved and the commission earned was split three ways. He said he earned about R40 000 during the first month which was paid in January 2014. This was in addition to his basic salary of about R19 000. He said that while he was there they always exceeded their targets.
He said he thinks they were appointed as supervisors at Morningside because there had been stock losses there of about R3 500 000 which had to be written off. They implemented processes to curb this. When he left in October 2017 the losses were down to about R1 200. 
The applicant was referred to some of his payslips eg he was paid commission of R35 308,02 on 1 May 2017 (page 30 of “B”) and R60 548,34 on 31 July 2017 (page 41 of “A”). He received no commission on 31 October 2017 after he was moved to Rosebank (page 35 of “B”) and R3 409,29 on 30 November 2017. He was on sick leave from 18 July 2017 to 20 August 2017. When he returned from leave he was paid his basic of about R19 000 and the average commission of the previous three months. 
He said he was informed by Mr J Mans (Area Manager) during July 2017 that the three supervisors at Morningside were being moved which surprised him. Mans could not explain the reasons, so he sent an email request to Mr Monadira (Regional Manager) for a meeting in this regard. They met on 17 July 2017 where the applicant emphasised that this was not a consultation because he (applicant) had requested the meeting. Monadira said he had been given a mandate to run the said region as he  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 741
  saw fit and he presented a forensic report, dated 12 September 2016, (pages 24–35 of “A”) which he said was the reason the decision had been made to move the 3 Store Supervisors from Morningside. The applicant said it was the first time he had seen this forensic report. The stock losses investigated in this report had been raised by Goncalves and he had traced the missing handsets being used on other networks. Goncalves had escalated the matter to the Business Risk Management Department (“BRM”) as staff of the respondent could have been involved in the said stock loss. One of the suggestions of BRM was that the 3 supervisors be charged for not following proper processes eg not blacklisting the handsets but if Goncalves had done this he would not have been able to trace the handsets that were sold in Krugersdorp. None of them had been charged as suggested yet the decision to move them was based on this forensic report. He said he was only charged after he referred this unfair labour practice to the CCMA. He said he had not even been interviewed by the BRM for this report as the other two supervisors had been. The access control records showed that he did not even have access to the stock control area, so the report did not apply to him. Despite this he was found guilty of negligence for failing to carry out his duties. He received a final written warning for 9 months in October 2017. Mankga was also charged but his case was thrown out and Goncalves received a final written warning valid for 6 months. The applicant said he applied to appeal, but nothing came of this because he resigned – his last day was 30 October 2017. 
The applicant said he was only employed again last Monday by Vulatel and is presently undergoing training by this company in optic fibre. 
His ex-wife was also employed by the respondent as a Regional Manager when he was working there. He referred to a printout of a WhatsApp conversation he had with her (page 36 of “A”). He said she threatened to have him moved from Morningside as it would hurt him financially. A couple of months after this he was told he was to move from Morningside. He said that she and Monadira are on the same level (she runs Gauteng 2).
He said that all this resulted in him suffering from high blood pressure and he was admitted to hospital where he was informed by the doctors that this was the result of stress at work (he feared loss of income and not being able to support his children). He said he had no choice other than to move and he chose the Rosebank branch. He has earned commission there of only between R3 000 and R4 000pm. This is probably because of the location and size of the store. Morningside is massive compared to Rosebank and the Carlton Centre (which was his other option). 
He referred to email correspondence with Monadira (pp 38–39 of “A”) which shows that he disagreed with being moved from Morningside. He said that Monadira’s response to his email is not consistent with what he said on 17 July 2017 – he said then that his move was because of the forensic report and this changed to this being an operational requirement. The applicant said he thinks he was moved because his ex-wife influenced Monadira to do this – he was doing a good job at Morningside so there was no reason to move him.  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 742
He started at Rosebank in about August 2017 (about a week after he was discharged from hospital). He did not make targets there – he did not see what he could do to increase sales there. It could not compare to Morningside for potential commission. He had travelled throughout SA to the branches of the respondent as part of a task team implementing compliance, so he knew how other stores were doing. 
During cross-examination, the applicant conceded that people do not have to agree when they consult. He said his initial contract did not change when he was moved to Morningside – his job description just changed. He signed the letter appointing him as Store Supervisor. He was referred to clause 8 of his initial contract (Place of work) which states that he may be expected to move due to operational requirements. He agreed that this includes all the other branches. He said when he was asked to move to Morningside he was given an indication of the potential commission he would earn at Morningside in an email sent by Makhoshi (HR). He agreed that the amount of commission paid is based on the performance of the branch. It is part of the job of a Store Supervisor to make the store more profitable by proper management e.g. reducing risk. He can devise plans in this regard but, ultimately it depends on the number of customers who purchase the products and services of the store – he had no control of this.
He denied that his evidence was that Morningside is the most profitable of the respondent’s stores in SA – he said he and the two other supervisors there earned the most commission. He compared what other supervisors told him to the stats and figures they received every month. He said he did not have access to these. He denied that his evidence in this regard is improbable. It was put to him that if a supervisor is moved to another store it is incumbent on him to put systems in place to make it profitable to meet targets. The applicant said one can’t compare a store like Morningside where he had 20 sales consultants with each one having his target and Rosebank where he had 5 consultants. The targets at Morningside are much higher but they met them. When he exceeded his targets at Rosebank he still only got about R3 000 commission. He denied that there was nothing preventing him from making the same amount of commission at Rosebank – he said it is impossible. This was disputed. 
The applicant was referred to the printout of the WhatsApp conversation he had with his ex-wife and asked where the date is. He said the date does not appear on the printout. He denied that it is insufficient evidence to prove that she had any influence on him being moved to Rosebank. He agreed that he did not report to his ex-wife at the time and that she is Regional Manager of Gauteng 2. He denied that his version in this regard is improbable. It was put to him that Monadira’s evidence will be that he never spoke to his ex-wife in this regard. There was no response.
The applicant was referred to an email sent to him and the other 2 supervisors by Mans confirming the branches they had chosen (page 8 of “B”). He denied that he had been consulted in this regard – he was in hospital when Mans phoned him to inform him. He said there were no valid reasons to move him. He was referred to the email he received from Monadira  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 743
  in this regard (page 38 of “B”). He denied that he was moved for operational reasons – Monadira had told him that it was done because of the BRM report and he was not charged for this before he was moved. He said his sanction was also harsher than that of Goncalves. He said he did not know that different Chairpersons presided at their hearings. 
It was put to the applicant that when he was appointed at Morningside it was not because of his ingenuity that there were so many customers there. The applicant said that they had corporate clients there which other branches did not have. He agreed that nothing stopped more customers from using the Rosebank branch. He said that more customers came to Morningside as it is a walk-in service centre. He agreed that the Rosebank branch was closed during the last week of his last month at Rosebank (October 2017) when he earned commission of about R3 000. 
During re-examination, the applicant said he never agreed to the move to Rosebank from Morningside because he would earn lower commission at Rosebank. He agreed to go to Morningside in the first place because of the higher commission promised to him there. He said it was not just up to the supervisor to get more customers at a branch. He said he had no say in corporates being added to the business at Morningside – all stores can now deal with corporates. There is more potential for earning commission at Morningside because it has more staff and resources there. 
Pinda Mankga stated that he started working for the respondent in about June 2009 as a Customer Services Representative at the Protea Gardens branch. He later attended a meeting (along with the applicant) with Mr Monadira at the Morningside branch where he discussed his expectations of them as Store Supervisors there. He decided to go to Morningside because it had potential for him to earn more commission than Protea Gardens. Morningside is in a good area and is known as the biggest flagship store in Gauteng. 
When he started there during 2013 he was made aware of issues regarding major stock losses and non-compliance with regulations. He was paid commission of between R30 000 and R40 000 between 2013 and 2017 when, without warning, he was informed by his Area Manager (Mans) that Monadira required them (himself, the applicant and Goncalves) to be moved from Morningside. Mans did not know what the reason was and suggested that he ask Monadira. They requested a meeting with him which took place on 17 July 2017 where Monadira told them he did not have to explain the reason for the move as he was in charge of that region. He showed them a forensic investigation report by BRM (page 24 of “A”). The witness said it was the first time he had seen this report. Monadira said his decision was final and he left the room. A week passed and Mans presented them with a list of stores they needed to choose from (pages 9–10 of B). He said that none of these stores had the same potential to earn commission as Morningside. He opted to go to the Mall of South because it is closer to his home. He started there on 1 September 2017 and has earned far less commission than when at Morningside – about R1 000 per month. He said that as the Store Supervisor he is responsible for the success of  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 744
  the store. He has tried to build the client base at the Mall of South. He tried to get some of his previous clients at Morningside to support his new branch but was unsuccessful. He can’t compete with Morningside. He does not know why he was moved from there. Monadira did not say anything about it being for operational reasons. 
During cross-examination the witness agreed that when he was moved from Protea Gardens to Morningside by Monadira there was no issue about the way it was done. He said he wanted to improve Morningside because it had been poorly managed resulting in major stock losses. When Monadira told them they had to move from Morningside he (witness) did not have a chance to go through the forensic report. This suggested that various sanctions be given to them (Supervisors) and others eg for negligence that resulted in further stock losses. 
It was put to the witness that Monadira’s version is that he was consulted by Mans who informed him of the reasons for him being moved. He said that if Mans had informed them of this they would never have requested a meeting with Monadira – they needed the full picture. 
The witness said he understood commission as dependent upon the store meeting targets which is his responsibility. When it was put to him that it is possible to earn the same amount of commission at the Mall of South branch as he did at Morningside he said he has found that to be impossible – Morningside is much busier than Mall of South. He did not dispute that Morningside is not the most profitable store in the RSA. 
Gavin Goncalves stated that he had been at the respondent for about 15 years. He was appointed as Senior Store Supervisor at Morningside at about the end of 2013 and found that the applicant and Mankga were already working there. He said they earned commission after meeting 80% of the stores monthly target. Initially they did not meet targets, but they built the store up to consistently meet targets. The lowest amount of commission he had been paid in a month there was about R20 000 and he averaged about R45 000 pm. Morningside paid much more commission than any other branches of the respondent. They had reduced previous stock losses at the store substantially. 
He said he was first informed that he was being moved around June 2017 when Mans informed them that he received such instruction. This was based on the forensic report done by BRM. This was because of some stock losses which he escalated to BRM to investigate. All who had access to stock were investigated and some were accused of being negligent. He said this meeting with Mans was before they were moved. A meeting with Monadira which they requested took place on 17 July 2017 – this was the first time he had seen the BRM report. They asked him why they had not been consulted before the decision was made to move them and he said that he had to move them owing to the forensic report. 
He said he chose to go to Northgate as it did not have a Supervisor there. It bought him time to sort his finances out. He said that in the previous month he was paid R6 000 commission – in his first month he was only paid R600 commission. This was nowhere close what he was paid in  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 745
  commission at Morningside. He was working on increasing the sales of the branch eg looking for customers in the Small and Medium Enterprises market. His explanation for the gap between what he was paid in commission at his present branch and Morningside is that the latter is the flagship store in Gauteng and is in a good location. 
During cross-examination the witness agreed that he is working on a strategy to tap into the Small and Medium Enterprises market and what you put into promoting sales as Store Supervisor you get out, but it also depends on the environment where the store is situated. He said that Mans told them he had a mandate to move them to other stores but could not give them reasons for this. He suggested that they request a meeting with the Regional Manager. He agreed that he had been moved before but he was first consulted. He agreed that people who consult do not necessarily have to agree. He said that if a decision is made it is made. 
During re-examination, the witness said he had no choice on whether to move to another store. 

Respondent’s case
Herbert Monadira, Regional Manager of Gauteng 1, said that the Gauteng 2 region is looked after by Nivi Naidoo who is the former wife of the applicant. The applicant reported to the Area Manager in Gauteng 1 and he reported to him (Monadira) before he resigned. 
He said that the payment of commission was introduced as an incentive to get staff to make more sales in the stores. He disagreed with the version that owing to Morningside being the flagship store in Gauteng staff are likely to earn higher commission there than at other stores – it depends on the input of sales staff. If they are not pulling their weight the Store Supervisor earns less commission as he receives an aggregate of the performance regarding meeting the target of the store. Different stores have different targets to meet depending on their size. He denied that if staff worked in Rosebank they could not earn as much commission as staff in Morningside. It is the responsibility of Store Supervisors to work on strategies to improve sales. They are supported by senior management in their efforts to do this. 
When he was informed of the testimony of the applicant and his witnesses that he did not consult them regarding the decision to move them to other stores he said they do not report directly to him but to the Area Manager. He said it was a joint decision – an operational matter. They were either required elsewhere or were not meeting the standards set at Morningside. This was a discussion that took place with all the regional managers and HR. The Area Manager was supposed to explain to the applicant the reason for him being moved. He sat with Mans and discussed this. They then received a meeting request which was gladly accepted. They met them and explained the reason for the move ie operational requirements. He said there were several issues at Morningside when they were moved there e.g. huge stock losses and non-compliance eg with the POPI Act. Management needed to intervene because customers were being exposed  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 746
  to harm. Despite the appointment of the abovementioned three supervisors these problems persisted at Morningside, so they needed to replace them.
When asked if the BRM report was a reason for them being moved he said it was an issue that was dealt with at Disciplinary Enquiries. He had first, however, been dealing with the failure to improve the abovementioned issues. He said it is not entirely true that they were informed at the meeting on 17 July 2017 that the BRM report was the reason they were moved. He had started his discussion on moving them around May 2017 – lack of confidence was expressed about them. Thereafter the BRM report was presented to them (management) which had to be dealt with. He said he dealt with their overall failure to manage their responsibilities at Morningside. On the 17th he explained to this to them as well as the BRM report. The respondent needed the correct human resources to be placed where they were needed – clause 8.1 of the employment contract applied. Management has a discretion to move human resources as required. He said it was not his intention to move the applicant to a store where he would earn less commission. What he earned in this regard was up to him. Rosebank has the same Living Standard Measure (LSM) as Morningside ie the clientele in both areas are similarly affluent. Rosebank also has an advantage over Morningside because many potential clients work there. The applicant needed to capture their custom by luring them.
He said Mans did consult with them – if he had not they would not have had queries which caused them to request a meeting with him. They were also given choices as to where they could go – Mans said they made mature decisions in this regard. No one complained that they were not consulted when he met them. 
He denied that his decision to move the applicant was influenced by his ex-wife. He regarded this to be an insult to his integrity. 
During cross-examination Monadira said that a Supervisor of a branch other than the Morningside branch had the potential to earn as much commission as a Supervisor at Morningside provided he increased such other branch’s client base (eg via cold calling) and did performance management. He denied that this is the task of Marketing – its responsibility is promoting the brand and not sales. He denied that clients of Morningside branch go there specifically eg to upgrade – the Supervisors there are also responsible for developing sales strategies to increase its client base. When it was put to the witness that the Morningside branch is a stand-alone entity whereas the Rosebank branch is part of a large shopping mall there was an objection on the grounds of this being irrelevant to the issue of whether the applicant was demoted by being deployed at Rosebank. As there is no factual evidence of what this difference makes to sales at these branches I upheld the objection. 
The witness did not dispute that the pay slips of the applicant for the three months he was the Supervisor at Rosebank indicate that he was paid less commission than he was paid when he was a Supervisor at Morningside. He denied that this meant that he was demoted when he was deployed at  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 747
  Rosebank. He said that what you put in you get out – the applicant did not put in sufficient work as the Supervisor at Rosebank to increase its sales. That was the cause of him being paid less commission than he was paid at Morningside. It is common cause that he was in hospital during the first month there; worked in the second month; and the store was revamped during his third month. He received an average of the commission during that month.
When asked why the applicant was moved to Rosebank the witness said that management is constantly moving employees around. The applicant had previously been moved from Balfour Park to Morningside based on his skills. The Supervisor he replaced was moved for disciplinary reasons. He denied that this was inconsistent with his previous evidence that he was moved in accordance with operational requirements. He said the applicant was moved to Rosebank because there was a vacancy there.
The witness was referred to an email he sent to Jacques Mans on 6 May 2017 (page 7 of “B”) in which he had stated that he had lost confidence in the Morningside store management. He said this was because of the write-offs of unaccounted stock and not owing to the BRM report. He said that Mans had engaged with the applicant and the other supervisors at Morningside in this regard. The witness disputed that moving them was a punitive measure based on the BRM report. He said that if what he did was incorrect then it was consistent with what he had done previously when he replaced a Supervisor at Morningside with the applicant. He exercised the same prerogative – he must act in the best interests of the Region. He said that commission paid was not the issue – it was whether management were putting proper processes in place. The supervisors at Morningside were not following company policy so they were replaced. The other two supervisors called by the applicant are not objective witnesses. 
When the witness was asked what measures he took to fix the problems identified at Morningside before moving the applicant he said Mans took certain steps in this regard and he could deal with this question. He denied that there had been no consultation with the applicant before he was moved – Mans had discussed the issue with the relevant supervisors. When they asked for clarification on the reasons for this he met them and explained to them what Mans had been mandated to do. He referred to an email that Mans had sent to them in which he had thanked them for their maturity in the way they had responded (page 8 of “B”). He said that the supervisors had not told him that they wanted to stay at Morningside – they wanted to understand why they were being moved. It had already been discussed with them why things were not working out with them at Morningside. He had to act to mitigate the risk. If they had asked to stay at Morningside he would have considered it. He was referred to the list of stores they had to choose from (page 10 of “B”) which did not include Morningside. He said this was not raised with him at the meeting they had on 17 July 2017 (page 38 of “A”). He denied that it was a unilateral decision to move the applicant. He said that it was his prerogative to decide that he should be moved. There was nothing to suggest that he should remain at Morningside.  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 748
During re-examination, the witness said that the supervisors did not tell him at the meeting on 17 July 2017 that they did not want to be moved and why. He said that the decision to move them had been made before they met on 17 July 2017. It was a strategic call he had to make based on operational requirements – retail is a high-risk environment. When he had previously moved the applicant he (applicant) had not applied to be moved. He discussed the matter with him and he decided that it would give the applicant a chance to develop himself as a manager. He was not promoted to Morningside – he remained a store manager/supervisor. His basic salary and conditions of employment remained the same. 
Jacques Mans stated that he oversees certain stores of the respondent in Gauteng. The applicant was a supervisor at Morningside who reported to Gavin Goncalves who reported to him (Mans). He was referred to clause 5 (Commission) of the applicant’s contract of employment (page 9 of “A”) which states that this is not guaranteed and clause 8 (Place of Work) which states that the employee may be expected from time to time to move to an alternative place of work due to operational requirements. The only amendment to his contract was when his job title was changed to Store Supervisor with effect from 1 September 2010 (page 23 of “A”). 
He said that around the beginning of May 2017 Monadira had discussed with him a report (BRM) regarding irregularities that were found to exist at the Morningside branch and the recommendations made in this regard. He (Mans) had made certain suggestions to him to implement processes to deal with these issues. Monadira, however, suggested that the applicant and the other two supervisors be moved to other stores and replaced. On 6 May 2017 he (Mans) had an informal meeting with the supervisors when he visited Morningside and informed them that Monadira wanted to move them to other branches based on the findings of the BRM report. He read the recommendations of the report to them. He said that re-deploying personnel to other branches was nothing new – it had been done before. They said they wanted to hear directly from Monadira why this decision had been made. A meeting was arranged between them on 17 July 2017 for this purpose. He (Mans) attended this meeting where Monadira was asked questions and he elaborated on the reasons for them being moved that he had given to him (Mans). This was in accordance with the operational requirements of the region and he (Monadira) was accountable to the region as Regional Manager. He said that the applicant and the other two supervisors had not asked to remain at Morningside. They just wanted to understand the reason behind it. Mans said he had provided them with a list of alternative stores where there were vacancies for Store Managers. The applicant chose to go to Rosebank. His position remained the same as it was at Morningside. Mans said that in addition to his basic salary the applicant could earn commission based on the sales performance of his store. He denied that this move was a demotion of the applicant. 
During cross-examination, Mans said that he had limited understanding of the decision to move the applicant from Morningside when he met him and the other two Supervisors, but he understood that it was based on the  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 749
  BRM report which was attached to the email Monadira sent to him (page 7 of “B”).
He agreed that the supervisors at Morningside earned the highest amount of Commission in the Gauteng Region. When asked if the applicant earned less commission when he moved to Rosebank than he earned when he was at Morningside he said he did not have the financial statements, so he could not say. He said that commission is based on the amount of sales made at a store. 
He said that after the BRM report had been received he made suggestions to Monadira on how they could address the problems identified at Morningside. He, however, said he needed to be consistent with previous practice when Supervisors had been moved from Morningside when similar problems were encountered and replaced by the applicant and the other two Supervisors. He said that employees could not request to be transferred to another store – each case was dealt with on its merits. He said that disciplinary proceedings were instituted against the three supervisors because they had failed to adhere to stock taking policy and stock had to be written off. The applicant received a Final Written Warning which was valid for 9 months. He referred to the Outcome of the DH (C).
Mans said that the three supervisors had expressed concern to him that moving from Morningside would impact on them financially. He said it was obvious that they did not want to move to other stores. He did not dispute that if they had objected to being moved it would not have made any difference to the outcome. He said he did not recall Monadira saying at the meeting on 17 July 2017 that he did not need a reason to relocate them.
During re-examination Mans said that the three supervisors had made suggestions on how to address the issues identified in the BRM report, but he could not recall the details except a suggestion that they bring more security guards in. He said they were consulted by him when he had discussed the move with them. 

Analysis of the evidence and argument
Mr Rothmann submitted that the unilateral and punitive decision to move him away from MTN Morningside to MTN Rosebank resulted in an unfair labour practice since the respondent failed to consult with the applicant and furthermore failed to provide him with the choice whether to stay at MTN Morningside or be relocated.
The result of the unfair labour practice is that the applicant suffered substantive financial loss as a result of the move in that his potential to earn the amount of commission as he did in MTN Morningside was substantially reduced at MTN Rosebank.
Demotion has been canvassed by the Labour Court in Solidarity obo JF Kern v R Mudau and others (JR987/05) [2007] ZALC 3 [reported at [2007] 6 BLLR 566 (LC) – Ed], where the Court in paragraph 39 referred to Van Der Riet v Leisure Net t/a Health and Racquet Clubs [1998] 5  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 750
  BLLR 471 (LAC) that, “failure to consult with an employee in a non-disciplinary demotion is unfair labour practice”. No consultations were held by the respondent and only upon a request from the applicant was a meeting held wherein it was explained to the applicant that they were being moved and that that decision was final. It was furthermore testified that the true reason for the move was based on the BMR report, which move was a punitive measure imposed by the employer without any disciplinary process followed.
The concept of demotion was elaborated on in Du Toit and others, Labour Relations Law (4ed at 456): “In law demotion could also mean a reduction or diminution of dignity, importance, responsibility, power or status even if salary attendant benefit and rank are retained”. Accordingly, the applicant was demoted as his commission, which falls within the ambit of salary, was diminished due to the move from MTN Morningside to MTN Rosebank.
In the unreported matter of Michelene Pretorius v G4S Secure Solutions (SA) (Pty) Ltd and others (case number JR2498/13) in the Labour Court, Steenkamp J at paragraph 14 stated that: “a reduction in salary can be a demotion, although it does not necessarily follow. And even without a reduction of salary, a transfer may in itself constitute a demotion.” Accordingly, the applicant was demoted when moved to MTN Rosebank which amounts to an unfair labour practice. 
During the arbitration proceedings, the respondent endeavoured to make out a case that as a result of operational requirements Monadira could move the applicant in accordance with his mandate and that no consultation was necessary with the applicant. This is disputed. 
The testimony of Mans was that there were other alternatives available to the respondent in order to avoid the move, however, the respondent dismissed the recommendations and persisted with its approach and decision to move the applicant. It was furthermore testified by all the witnesses, except for Monadira, that the commission earned at MTN Morningside, as a flagship store, was higher than any other MTN branch in the Gauteng 1 region. 
Notwithstanding the applicant not wanting to move from Morningside the respondent unilaterally moved him from MTN Morningside. Although the applicant was allowed to elect an MTN branch to which to move he did not have the option at staying at the MTN Morningside branch.
Demotion and the amount of compensation to be awarded to the employee has been canvassed by the Labour Appeal Court in ARB Electrical Wholesalers (Pty) Ltd v Hibbert (DA3/13) [2015] ZALAC 34; [2015] 11 BLLR 1081 (LAC); (2015) 36 ILJ 2989 (LAC) (21 August 2015), in which it was held at paragraph 22: 

“The compensation that an employee, who has been unfairly dismissed or subjected to unfair labour practice, may be awarded is not aimed at making good the patrimonial loss that s/he has suffered. The concept of loss or patrimonial loss may play a role to evince the impact of the wrong upon the employee and thus assists towards the determination of appropriate compensation, but compensation under the LRA is a statutory compensation 

 
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 751

and must not to be confused with a claim for damages under the common law, or a claim for breach of contract or a claim in delict. Hence, there is no need for an employee to prove any loss when seeking compensatory relief under the LRA.”

The result of the unfair labour practice is that the applicant suffered substantive financial loss as a result of the move in that his possibility to earn the same amount of commission as he did in MTN Morningside was diminished.
Accordingly, the applicant is entitled to monetary relief for the amount of the indignation he has suffered at the hands of the employer.
During the arbitration proceedings, the respondent’s legal representative, raised a point in law that commission falls within the ambit of a “benefit” and accordingly does not form part of the applicant’s remuneration/salary.
It was the applicant’s case that commission falls within the scope of remuneration/salary and does not constitute a benefit. 
Section 213 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (as amended) (“LRA”) defines remuneration to mean “. . . any payment in money or in kind, or both in money and in kind, made or owing to any person in return for that person working for any other person, including the State, and remunerate has a corresponding meaning”.
In Apollo Tyres South Africa (Pty) Ltd v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and others (2013) 34 ILJ 1120 (LAC) [also reported at [2013] 5 BLLR 434 (LAC) – Ed] the Court followed the principle as adopted in Schoeman and another v Samsung Electronics SA (Pty) Ltd (1997) 18 ILJ 1098 (LC) [also reported at [1997] 10 BLLR 1364 (LC) – Ed], in which the Court held:

“commission payable by the employer, forms part of the employee’s salary. It is a quid pro quo for services rendered just as much as a salary or a wage. It is therefore part of the basic terms and conditions of employment. Remuneration is different from ‘benefits’. A benefit is something extra, apart from remuneration. Often it is a term and condition of an employment contract and often not. Remuneration is always a term and condition of the employment contract.”

The term benefit was ventilated in the matter of Gaylard v Telkom SA Ltd (C153/97) [1998] ZALC 13 (15 May 1998) [also reported at [1998] 9 BLLR 942 (LC) – Ed], where the Court held that: 

“If the term “benefit” is so generously interpreted so as to include any advantage or right in terms of the employment contract, even wages, item 2(1)(b) would all but preclude strikes and lock-outs. This was plainly not what the legislature had in mind. Therefore, wages and salaries, in other words remuneration, should be excluded from the term ‘benefits’. In the same vain, accumulated leave pay should also be excluded as it is nothing more than remuneration based on the contract between the parties.”

He submitted that commission earned falls within the ambit of the applicant’s remuneration/salary and does not constitute a benefit. 
Taking into consideration the aforementioned legal jurisprudence, the applicant’s dispute constitutes an unfair labour practice, as contained in  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 752
  section 186(2)(a) of the LRA. The applicant was unfairly demoted, when his commission was lessened as a result of the respondent’s decision to unilaterally move the applicant from one branch to another. 
The current matter is in respect of an unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2)(a) of the LRA as it revolves around a dispute regarding a demotion wherein the employee’s commission was lessened due to a unilateral transfer from one branch of MTN to another.
Accordingly, the applicant prays for monetary relief in the amount of 12 months remuneration as compensation which includes the average commission he earned at MTN Morningside.
After summarising the evidence Mr Tom submitted that the core issue in this matter is whether the transfer of the applicant from Morningside to Rosebank constituted an unfair demotion. 
He submitted that a demotion is said to have occurred when there is a reduction or diminution of dignity, importance, responsibility, prestige, power, capabilities or status even if salary, attendant benefits and rank are retained. He referred to the case of Nxele v Chief Deputy Commissioner, Corporate Services, Department of Correctional Services and others [2008] 12 BLLR 1179 (LAC) as authority for this. 
In Murray / Independent Newspapers (2003) 24 ILJ 1420 (CCMA), the Commissioner held that the onus is on the employee who alleges demotion to show that they have objectively “suffered a loss of benefits or diminution in status.” 
In SAPS v Salukazana and others [2010] 7 BLLR 764 (LC), the Labour Court held that if the transfer of an employee results in a reduction of status, such amounts to a demotion. The Court further held that “if a transfer leads to a change in terms and conditions of employment which amount to a demotion, an employee is entitled to bring a claim of unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2) [of the LRA].”
In his position at Rosebank, the applicant retained his basic salary, benefits, job title, grading, description, and status. The terms and conditions of his employment contract were not altered so he was still employed in a commission earning position.
All the witnesses, except for the applicant, testified that the appointment of the applicant was region specific and not store specific. This is supported by an email sent to the applicant by Monadira, dated 20 August 2017, at 10:51am. He submitted that on this basis alone, the applicant’s claim should be dismissed.
As per clause 8.1 of the applicant’s employment contract, the applicant was fully aware of the nature of his employment, specifically pertaining to the transfers according to the operational needs of MTN. Following from this, in 2013 the applicant accepted the first transfer from Balfour Park to Morningside. All the witnesses during the course of their employment, except for Monadira, rotated between different stores within the Gauteng 1 region. These rotations are a standard procedure within the  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 753
  respondent. Moreover, a transfer clause is contained the applicant’s employment contract.
The reasons for the transfer were fully explained to the applicant and the other store supervisors on 5 July 2017 and 17 July 2017 respectively. Therefore, the applicant’s transfer does not amount to a demotion in that it is consistent with clause 8.1 of his contract of employment. The transfer did not amount to a variation of the conditions of the applicant’s contract of employment.
The failure of the applicant to earn as much commission at Rosebank as he did at Morningside does not amount to a demotion. In Schoeman and another v Samsung Electronics SA (Pty) Ltd [1997] 10 BLLR 1364 (LC) the Labour Court held that commission “is a quid pro quo for services rendered, just as much as a salary or wage.” It therefore did not constitute a benefit under item 2(1)(b) of the LRA. In light of this case, commission becomes part of remuneration once an individual is entitled to it.
The Labour Appeal Court in Zapop (Pty) Ltd v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and others [2016] 9 BLLR 910 (LAC) considered whether an Arbitrator has jurisdiction to adjudicate on commission payments. 
He submitted that it is clear in the Zapop case that commission is a unique type of remuneration in that its accrual is linked to performance. As per clause 5 of the applicant’s employment contract, he was entitled to commission which is payable in accordance with the respondent’s policy. Henceforth the determinant factor in a remuneration dispute regarding commission is the applicant’s entitlement to commission and not the quantity, due to its seasonal nature. A dispute regarding quantity finds relevance only in cases where the aggrieved party is disputing the requirements set in order for him to become entitled to commission. 
Clause 5 of the applicant’s employment contract also does not guarantee the payment of commission. Clause 5 provides that; “should [an employee] be transferred to a position where commission is no longer payable, the commission payment will be discontinued.” Therefore, this clause allows for instances where an employee may be transferred to a position where he is no longer entitled to commission. Such a transfer is removed out of the ambit of a demotion as it is in accordance with the terms and conditions of employment to which the employee consented. 
The applicant, Goncalves and Mankga conceded that commission is performance based. In other words, commission is based on how a store manager performs in a particular store. This aspect was further emphasised by Monadira during his testimony in-chief and cross-examination.
The applicant contends that the transfer from Morningside to Rosebank resulted in the reduction of his commission. Furthermore, the applicant averred that due to the Morningside store being one of the respondent’s largest stores nationwide, it offers greater prospects to earn a higher commission than other stores nationally. The applicant contended that the high commission earned at the Morningside store was due to a greater  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 754
  number of clientele, particularly Small and Medium Enterprises (“SME’s”). He further stated that because of the stores location, it attracted a greater number of affluent clients.
The applicant, Mankga and Goncalves, however, conceded that entitlement to commission is dependent on the store’s sales performance, thus the ability of a store to meet set sale targets. Mans further confirmed that every store is given a sales target, hence a store’s performance-based target will determine the amount of commission earned.
Monadira testified that, firstly, the target allocated to each store correlates with the store size and, secondly, the aggregate commission earned by the supervisors is measured percentage wise across all stores. Monadira stated that if a store reaches its store specific target or exceeds its target, the percentage reached will determine the amount of commission earned across every store inclusive of the Morningside store. 
Contrary to the applicant’s and Mankga’s assertions that due to the client feed and strategic location of the Morningside store, no other store has the capacity to make the amount of commission earned in Morningside, Goncalves, a witness of the applicant, testified that by tapping into the SME market and reducing the risk of fraudulent conduct, it is possible over time to increase the commission of a store to one equal to the earnings at Morningside. Goncalves stated that he was currently incrementally employing the above strategies in order to increase commission at the Northgate store to which he was transferred in 2017. 
Monadira also stated that the following factors contribute towards increased commission: the implementation of employment sales strategies in order to draw a larger clientele; the establishment of performance improvement plans; and the assistance of store consultants in order to ensure that they meet their individual targets. Mans testified that he did not consider the transfer of the applicant as constituting a demotion, as the terms and conditions of employment remained the same. He further stated that he had raised with the applicant that instead of sharing the commission with two other store supervisors at the Morningside store, the applicant was going to take all the commission earned at the Rosebank store as he was the only store supervisor employed there.
The applicant submitted no documentary evidence showing the financial statements in relation to the performance of the different stores i.e. Morningside and Rosebank. The applicant failed to tender evidence to substantiate the contention that he could not earn the same amount of commission earned at the Morningside store. By accepting the mere “say so” of the applicant would result in the commissioner accepting speculation and conjecture. The applicant’s evidence in this regard should be rejected as it is not based on fact.
With reference to Schoeman and Zapop cases (above) it is not the applicant’s case that the requirements for earning commission at Rosebank were different to those in Morningside. All the witnesses testified that the requirements are the same namely, that if an employee puts in the work  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 755
  and attracts clients to the store, he will receive commission commensurate with his output. 
The applicant received commission to which he was entitled as per clause 5 of his employment contract, based on his input and performance. His failure to earn a greater or similar commission to which he earned at the Morningside store is due to his failure to implement sales strategies and improvement plans. He only worked for a month at the Rosebank store (October 2017). In August 2017 he was ill and was resultantly paid the average commission earned at the Morningside store. In September 2017, there were renovations taking place at the Rosebank store, so not much was happening, however, the applicant was paid his non-commission remuneration. The applicant resigned on 31 October 2017. He was simply not willing to adjust to the environment at Rosebank and make the store profitable.
The applicant’s failure to meet targets which would have, in turn, enabled him to earn commission, can never be said to amount to a demotion. He failed to submit evidence to the effect that he performed well and achieved his targets but was not paid his commission for services rendered.
Mr Tom disputed the applicant’s claim that he was not consulted before he was transferred to the Rosebank store. He accepted, however, that Mans approached him and the other supervisors on or about 5 July 2017 to inform them that in light of the BRM report Monadira intended to transfer them. Monadira clarified the reasons for the transfer to the applicants as constituting the following: governance issues identified in the store; stock theft; and lack of proper controls on the part of the team. These were loosely referred to as operational requirements.
The supervisors requested a meeting which was held on 17 July 2017 with Monadira to address the concerns raised with Mans at the previous meeting. They maintained that Monadira highlighted the findings in the BRM report as the reason for the transfer. 
He submitted that clause 8.1 of the applicant’s employment contract mandates transfers according to the operational requirements of MTN. The applicant thus consented to transfers within the Gauteng 1 region by signing his employment contract. The consultation in the context of the transfer was to afford the applicant an opportunity to be heard before the decision to transfer was taken.
He submitted that Goncalves, a witness of the applicant, confirmed that Mans on 5 July 2017 consulted with the Morningside management team in order to inform them of the pending transfer and further explained that the BRM report played a significant role in the decision for transfer. Goncalves explained that the meeting on 17 July 2017 was a follow-up to the consultation with Mans in order to address concerns raised by the three supervisors. 
Mans testified that on 5 July 2017, he met with the Morningside management team in order to inform them of the pending transfer as per communications held between him and Monadira, regarding Monadira’s  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 756
  loss of confidence in the team, on 6 May 2017 and 5 July 2017. It is clear from the correspondence between him and Monadira that the issue was a serious operational matter. Whether or not Mans was right to consider his consultation with the group as informal, does not change the fact that the meeting was convened to inform the group about the pending decision to transfer them. 
He submitted that Monadira asserted during cross-examination, that the meeting held on 5 July 2017 constituted a consultation. Upon discovery that the supervisors were unsatisfied with Mans’ answers to the concerns raised, he took it upon himself to address the group at a meeting held on 17 July 2017. At the said meeting Monadira reasoned that the transfer occurred due to operational requirements in order to address: a lack of compliance with MTN procedures; high incidences of write-offs; and a lack of profitability. He further indicated that he had to be consistent in his actions as a regional manager.
There is thus no basis on which to suggest that the applicant was not given an opportunity to be heard before he was transferred to the Rosebank store. The fact that the consultation held on 17 July 2017 was at the behest of the applicant does not render it less of a consultation. In any event a party to a consultation is requested to seek clarity on some of the issues which form the subject matter of the consultation. The transfer of the applicant was a sensible response to an operational deficiency identified by the respondent in the Morningside store. 
The applicant has failed to prove that the respondent committed an unfair labour practice. 
Section 186 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (as amended) (“the LRA”) defines the meaning of unfair labour practice as:

‘“Unfair labour practice’ means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –

(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
(b) unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
(c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
(d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures.”
The first question I must answer is whether the applicant has proved, on a balance of probabilities, that his transfer from Morningside to Rosebank constituted a demotion.
Despite the fact that the applicant retained his job title and function as Store Supervisor and that his basic terms and conditions of employment remained the same when he was transferred to Rosebank I have been persuaded that this was tantamount to a demotion. 
When he was transferred as Store Supervisor at Balfour Park to Morningside as a Store Supervisor this was done on the basis of merit. During  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 757
  2013 Monadira and Makoshi (HR) asked him how he felt about moving to the Morningside branch based on his performance at Balfour Park. He had received two awards for Outstanding Compliance there. According to Monadira when the applicant and his fellow Store Supervisors were moved to Morningside there were several issues there eg huge stock losses and non-compliance eg with the POPI Act. He said that management needed to intervene because customers were being exposed to harm. Monadira testified that the applicant had been moved from Balfour Park to Morningside based on his skills. Monadira approaching the applicant to move to Morningside was thus a vote of confidence in him. According to the applicant he and his fellow Supervisors successfully implemented processes at Morningside to curb the stock losses. This was not disputed. The rewards which the applicant received as a Supervisor at Morningside (described as a flagship store in Gauteng) were significant. During his first month there he earned R40 000 in commission and his pay slip for July 2017 indicates that he was paid R60 548,34 in commission. These amounts were in addition to his basic salary of R19 059,95. He had 20 sales consultants at Morningside with each one having his own target. The commission earned was split between three Supervisors. Morningside was clearly the largest and most successful branch in Gauteng and the applicant, being one of the three Supervisors there, was clearly in a prestigious position. 
Monadira, however, lost his confidence in the said 3 Supervisors after Business Risk Management received a report on 5 August 2016 that three iPhones had gone missing from the Morningside Inventory Room. This resulted in an investigation during which a fourth handset was also found to be missing. The Outcome of the investigation is in the Forensic Investigation Report (“BRM Report”), dated 12 September 2016, which indicated that certain procedures regarding control of stock had not been followed by the Store Supervisors. It was also found that the 3 Supervisors had access to the inventory when the items went missing. The BRM Report recommended management should consider a sanction against them for failure to adhere to laid down policies and for negligence. 
On 6 May 2017, Monadira sent an email to Mans to which he attached the abovementioned BRM Report and referred to a discussion he had with Mans “and team” about the “report”. It is highly probable in the circumstances that he was referring to the said BRM Report. He stated, “. . . the variances also in Morningside from October 2016 which were now brought to my attention too for a write-off is concerning as discussed before going on leave.” He then stated:

“I now do not have confidence in the Morningside store management to effectively run the area without it being compromised again and we should both expedite the movements to other stores as the only option.”

In the context of other evidence it is highly probable that he was referring in this email to his decision to transfer the 3 supervisors to other stores without considering other options to deal with the problem. This is consistent with Monadira’s evidence that management has a discretion in terms of clause 8.1 of the employment contracts with employees to move  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 758
  human resources as required. He had done a similar thing before when he decided that the applicant was the right man to place at Morningside owing to his skills. He said that the applicant and the other two Supervisors at Morningside were not following company policy so they were replaced. He also said that it was his prerogative to decide that they should be moved and there was nothing to suggest that they should remain at Morningside. 
Clause 8.1 did give him the discretion to make this decision but the problem was that he exercised it before giving the applicant or the other supervisors an opportunity to comment on the allegations made against them in the BRM Report or any other allegations that may have questioned their competency to do their jobs as supervisors at Morningside. This was a breach of the maxim audio alteram partem (hear the other side). They were not given the opportunity to give their side of the story before the decision was made to move them. 
This was confirmed by the respondent’s other witness – Mans, who stated that around the beginning of May 2017 Monadira had discussed with him a report (BRM) regarding irregularities that were found to exist at the Morningside branch and the recommendations made in this regard. He (Mans) had made certain suggestions to him to implement processes to deal with these issues. Monadira, however, suggested that the applicant and the other two supervisors be moved to other stores and replaced. Thereafter, on 6 May 2017, when Mans visited the Morningside branch (as part of his duties as Area Manager) he informed the 3 supervisors that Monadira wanted to move them to other branches based on the findings of the BRM Report. He read the recommendations of the BRM Report to them.
This cannot be regarded as a consultation – it was not a dialogue or a discussion with the Supervisors, they had merely been informed that a decision had been made to move them on the basis of the BRM Report. They were not satisfied with this and informed Mans that they wanted to hear directly from Monadira why this decision had been made. A meeting was then arranged between Monadira and the supervisors where Monadira elaborated on the reasons for them being moved that he had given to him (Mans). This too cannot be regarded as a consultation for the same reasons that the meeting with Mans was not a consultation. It was a fait accompli that they would be moved no matter what any of the supervisors may have said. 
During cross-examination, Mans said that the three supervisors had expressed concern to him that moving from Morningside would impact on them financially. He said:

“It was obvious that they did not want to move to other stores.”

Mans did not dispute that if they had objected to being moved it would have made no difference to the outcome.
In his evidence-in-chief he said that the applicant chose to go to the Rosebank branch. This, however, was after a decision had been already  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 759
  made by Monadira that the 3 supervisors would be moved from Morningside branch because he had lost confidence in them. He and the other two supervisors were presented with a list of branches they had to choose from if they wanted to continue being employed by the respondent. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the applicant willingly gave up his position at Morningside. This is corroborated by the email that the applicant sent to Monadira on 20 July 2017 (pages 38–39 of “A”). 
Mans also stated in his evidence-in-chief that the applicant’s position remained the same as it was in Morningside – in addition to his basic salary remaining the same he could also earn commission based on the sales performance of his new store. He thus denied that the applicant was demoted. Even though, however, the applicant retained his position as a Store Supervisor the scale of the operation of the respondent at Rosebank was much smaller than that at Morningside. The fact that Morningside needed three supervisors in itself shows this. The large amounts of commission they earned there also show this to be a fact. Being moved to Rosebank was thus tantamount to a demotion because it resulted in a diminution in status, importance, prestige and responsibility of the applicant.
In addition, even though I understand the argument that the applicant and the other two supervisors could, theoretically, have adopted sales strategies to eventually be earning as much commission as they earned at Morningside this did not happen in the short term for any of them so being moved also resulted in them receiving less remuneration which also amounts to a demotion. 
The respondent was thus required to consult with the applicant prior to making the decision to move him to the much smaller Rosebank branch and, for the reasons stated above, this did not happen. This does not mean he had to agree to being moved before this could be done. He was, however, entitled to give his side of the story before the decision was made. As this did not happen the respondent committed an unfair labour practice when it transferred the applicant from Morningside to Rosebank. 
In terms of section 193(4) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the Act”):

“An arbitrator appointed in terms of this Act may determine any unfair labour practice dispute referred to the arbitrator, on terms that the arbitrator deems reasonable, which may include ordering reinstatement, re-employment or compensation.”

The applicant seeks compensation. In terms of section 194(4) of the Act such compensation must be just and equitable in all the circumstances, but not more than the equivalent of 12 month’s remuneration. 
The remuneration referred to must be referring to the amount he was being paid at the time of the unfair labour practice ie the time when the decision was made to transfer him to Rosebank. As remuneration has been held by our Courts to include commission this must also be taken into account. 
The applicant’s gross remuneration for July 2017 was R70 808,29; for August 2017 was R84 042,68; and for September 2017 was R75 140,18.  
[2018] 7 BALR 739 (CCMA) at 760

  The monthly average for his last three months at Morningside was R229 991,15 divided by three = R76 663,72. 

Taking into consideration the period of his employment with the respondent (about 9 years) and the unfair manner in which he was treated I find that 3 months of such remuneration would be just and equitable compensation. 3 months x R76 663,72 = R229 991,15.

Award 
The respondent committed an unfair labour practice when it transferred the applicant from its Morningside branch to its Rosebank branch without consulting him. 
The respondent is ordered to pay the applicant the amount of R229 991,15 (less statutory deductions such as PAYE) on or before 29 March 2018. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document