



Makalima-Ngewana / Open Society Foundation for South Africa NPC [2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: WECT8186-21
Date: 27/01/2022
Before: J Carelse, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — CEO placed on “precautionary” suspension pending disciplinary action which resulted in warning — No unfair labour practice because suspension warranted in circumstances. 

Editor’s Summary


The applicant was suspended from her position as CEO of the respondent’s South African division pending a disciplinary hearing into charges of using her business credit card for personal purposes, initiating and approving the appointment of four managers without following proper recruitment procedures and approving funding of R800 000 for a private company. She was subsequently found guilty on the first and second charges and issued with a written warning. The applicant claimed that her suspension amounted to an unfair labour practice, for which she sought compensation. The respondent contended that the suspension was lawful and fair.

The Commissioner noted that the respondent had relied on the judgment in Long v SA Breweries (Pty) Ltd [2019] 6 BLLR 515 (CC), in which the highest court had ruled that there is no requirement that a suspended employee should be invited to make representations where the suspension is “precautionary”, as opposed to punitive. However, the Commissioner held that, although the disciplinary code provided that it was merely a guideline, the respondent had invoked the code when suspending the applicant and had also applied the code in the disciplinary procedures. However, that the respondent had not followed its disciplinary code did not mean that the applicant was entitled to compensation. She had been suspended because disciplinary charges were pending to avoid her interfering with witnesses, which was possible because of the position she held. She had been suspended on full pay and provided no evidence to support her claim that the suspension had affected her health. The applicant had, accordingly, failed to prove that her suspension amounted to an unfair labour practice. 

The application was dismissed.

 
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 505

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation
The arbitration hearing took place on 7 September 2021 and was finalised on 14 January 2022 at the CCMA offices in Cape Town. The proceedings were digitally and manually recorded. 
The applicant was present and represented by Mr I Haffegee, an attorney at Haffegee Roskam Savage Attorneys. The respondent was represented by Advocate J Raizon, instructed by Harris Nupen Molebatsi Attorneys. 
Both parties handed in a bundle of documents as evidence. The applicant’s bundle was marked bundle “A”, whilst the respondent’s bundle was marked bundle “B”. 
I afforded the parties an opportunity to tender written closing argument by no later than 20 January 2022, which deadline both parties have complied with. 

Issue in dispute
I must decide whether the respondent perpetrated an unfair labour practice (unfair suspension) against the applicant. If I decide that the respondent perpetrated an unfair labour practice relating to suspension against the applicant, I must decide what the appropriate remedy will be. 

Background to the dispute
The Open Society Foundation (“OSF”) is one of the leading humanitarian organisations working towards the promotion of justice, democratic governance and human rights. It provides funding for different projects through a network of national and regional foundations and offices. The OSF is governed by a Global Board, which oversees the activities of the various regions and national boards. OSF has established a foundation in South Africa – OSF-SA, whose main objective is to promote the values, institutions and practices of an open, civil and democratic society. OSF-SA is governed by a Board, which is the highest decision-making body in South Africa. The OSF-SA is headed by the Executive Director. The applicant is employed by the respondent as an Executive Director on a fixed term contract from 1 November 2019 to 1 November 2024. The applicant earns a gross annual salary of R1 800 [sic]. The applicant’s contract of employment provides, inter alia, that the OSF-SA’s disciplinary and grievance procedure shall not form part of the terms and conditions of her employment and are intended to serve only as a guideline. 
The respondent placed the applicant on precautionary suspension on 11 May 2021 with immediate effect pending a disciplinary enquiry into allegations of misconduct. The applicant was charged with using the company credit card for personal expenses, initiating and ultimately approving the appointment of four senior employees without following the proper recruitment process and allegedly approving funding in the sum of R800 000 to a “for-profit” private company.  
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 506
The respondent’s HR Policy provides: 

“Suspension pending outcome of hearing 

In cases where the allegations are so serious that, if proved, OSF-SA or employees may suffer significant harm if the employee remains at work or where the presence of the employee may significantly hamper OSF-SA’s investigation into the alleged misconduct, the line manager may propose to suspend the employee on full pay pending the outcome of the disciplinary enquiry. 

The employee must be informed of the reasons for the proposed suspension and be provided with the opportunity to give input as to whether he or she should be suspended. 

A suspended employee will receive the normal daily remuneration during the suspension period. The suspension period will be at the discretion of the Executive Director, in consultation with the HR Manager, and the Board as relevant.” 

It is common cause that the respondent did not provide the applicant with an opportunity to give input as to whether she should be suspended. The suspension letter provided, inter alia, as follows:
“5. In the event that you would like to make representations regarding your continued suspension, you should make such representations within four (4) working days of receipt of this letter.”
The chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry found the applicant guilty of using the corporate credit card for her personal expenses and appointing the four senior employees without following the proper recruitment process. He further found that a written warning was the appropriate sanction in the circumstances. The applicant claims that the suspension was unfair and wants to be compensated. 

Summary of evidence and argument 

The applicant’s evidence and argument
The applicant testified under oath and stated that on 11 March 2021 she was suspended with immediate effect by the chairperson of the board, Ms Morifi. She was called out of a meeting and told to pack up her belongings, leave behind her laptop and keys and leave the workplace. She stated that this came as a shock to her and her colleagues. She was handed the suspension notice and notice to attend a disciplinary hearing (pages 1–5 of bundle “A”). She contended that she was not permitted by the respondent to make any input prior to her suspension as to whether she should be suspended, albeit that the respondent’s HR policy makes provision for such input. After being suspended, she did seek legal advice and appointed an attorney who has made [sic] with the respondent on her behalf to lift the suspension and place her on special leave instead. (Pages 23–25 of Bundle “A”).
She stated further that she has suffered significant prejudice because of the way she was suspended, as she became severely depressed, and her family suffered as a result thereof. 
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 507
Under cross-examination, she denied that she would have interfered with any of the respondent’s witnesses. She does not believe that she could have influenced any of the respondent’s witnesses because what would she say to them? She gave her full co-operation in the investigation process. She does not believe that there was a risk of her interfering with any of the witnesses and she truly believes that her staff will speak the truth because they are professionals in their own right with years of experience in their respective fields. 

The respondent’s evidence and argument
Ms Mary-Jane Morifi (“Morifi”) testified for the respondent under oath and stated that the board received an anonymous email from a whistleblower stating that several complaints have been received from grantees (organisations that receive grants from the respondent) and internal sources making several allegations of misconduct against the applicant. These complaints were raised in the hopes that the board would do something about it and investigate it properly. They threatened to take the matter to the media if the board did nothing about it. She engaged with the board, and they decided to initiate an independent investigation. She stated further that the board decided to suspend the applicant on full pay because the whistle-blower said that there were internal OSF staff who had information and they were afraid that they would not be able to speak freely. The key focus was to ensure that there was not an environment created where witnesses would feel constrained from giving free and open evidence. 
She contended that the board did not give the applicant an opportunity to make representations as to why she should not be suspended. They wanted to make it clear that they are neutral and impartial. She averred that the charges against the applicant were of a serious nature and amongst other things, the applicant is the financial delegation of authority and can approve one million rand in grants without the board’s approval. She averred that the suspension was done so that there would not be a view that the witnesses will not be able to provide their testimony. The applicant is the Executive Director of the organisation with no line manager above her and she does not know how easy or difficult it would be exercising authority over some individuals who initiated the contact with the whistle-blower who gave the information. In the board’s view they felt it would have been difficult for her to exercise that authority over the staff. Furthermore, the applicant has a financial delegation of authority of one million rand, and they did not want to be seen to be negligent and continuing to entrust the applicant while the disciplinary hearing was going on and she had to answer to charges that had financial implications on them. 
Under cross-examination she stated that the applicant was found not guilty of giving money to a non-profit organisation. The reason why the board decided to suspend the applicant was to give her time to prepare her case and so that the witnesses were free to provide their evidence without influence. She does not recall testifying about not trusting the applicant as  
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 508
  a reason for suspension. She contended that the HR policy does not apply to the Executive Director. She stated that the applicant did not advise them why she should not be suspended. They did not have the opportunity to consider the request for special leave. She stated that there was a request for special leave from the applicant’s side, but the board did not decide and deliberate on which way they were going to go because they received a referral from the CCMA. She denied that they were ignoring the applicant’s request. 

Analysis of evidence and argument
It is trite law that the applicant bears the onus to prove that the respondent perpetrated an unfair labour practice against her by suspending her from work on 11 March 2021. The applicant’s case is that she was denied the opportunity to make representations as to why she should not be suspended prior to the respondent taking the decision to suspend her. It is further the applicant’s case that the respondent’s reason for suspending her is unfounded and that she was severely prejudiced as a result of being suspended. The respondent relies on the Constitutional Court judgment of Long v SAB (Pty) Ltd and others [2019] 6 BLLR 515 (CC) where the Constitutional Court held that where the suspension is precautionary and not a disciplinary action, the requirements relating to fair disciplinary action under the Labour Relations Act 55 of 1996, as amended, (“the LRA”) finds no application. Therefore, there is no requirement to afford the applicant an opportunity to make representations before the precautionary suspension is effected. To this end, the respondent’s case is that the applicant was not entitled to make representations before being placed on precautionary suspension. 
It is common cause that the respondent did not afford the applicant an opportunity to make representations before deciding to place her on precautionary suspension. The respondent’s argument is that its HR disciplinary and grievance policy (“the HR policy”) does not apply to the applicant and serves as a mere guideline. It is not in dispute that this is stated in the applicant’s contract of employment. The applicant’s case is that the HR policy applies to her because the respondent applied the HR policy when it decided to initiate disciplinary action against her. I agree with the applicant’s argument in this regard. Moreover, in terms of the notice of precautionary suspension, the applicant was placed on precautionary suspension in terms of the HR policy. This is specifically stated by the respondent. It is therefore clear that although the HR policy was to serve as a mere guideline in terms of the applicant’s contract of employment, in practice, the respondent applied it as early as when it decided to place the applicant on precautionary suspension. In view of the aforesaid, I find the respondent has failed to apply its own policy insofar as the applicant’s precautionary suspension is concerned. I agree with the applicant’s argument in this respect. However, whether this breach alone warrants compensation is questionable
Moreover, it has been clarified by the Constitutional Court that since a precautionary suspension is not regarded as disciplinary action, there is no  
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 509
  requirement in law that an employee be afforded an opportunity to make representations before the precautionary suspension is effected. 
I now turn to the question whether the precautionary suspension of the applicant was permissible. In Long v SAB the Constitutional Court held as follows at paragraph 24 and 25:
“[24] In respect of the merits, the Labour Court’s finding that an employer is not required to give an employee an opportunity to make representations prior to a precautionary suspension, cannot be faulted. As the Labour Court correctly stated, the suspension imposed on the applicant was a precautionary measure, not a disciplinary one. 13. This is supported by Mogale 13, Mashego 14 and Gradwell 15. Consequently, the requirements relating to fair disciplinary action under the LRA cannot find application. Where the suspension is precautionary and not punitive, there is no requirement to afford the employee an opportunity to make representations.
[25] In determining whether the precautionary suspension was permissible, the Labour Court reasoned that the fairness of the suspension is determined by assessing first, whether there is a fair reason for suspension and secondly, whether it prejudices the employee. The finding that the suspension was for a fair reason, namely for an investigation to take place, cannot be faulted. Generally, where the suspension is on full pay, cognisable prejudice will be ameliorated. The Labour Court’s finding that the suspension was precautionary and did not materially prejudice the applicant, even if there was no opportunity for pre-suspension representations, is sound.” 
In the Long case, the Constitutional Court upheld the decision of the Labour Court that the suspension was for a fair reason because it was done for an investigation to take place. In this case, the investigation was already completed but the board believed it was necessary to place the applicant on precautionary suspension to prevent the applicant from potentially interfering with material witnesses and evidence pending the enquiry into the allegations of misconduct. The applicant is the Executive Director, and she possesses more influence and power than any other employee in her office. Considering the applicant’s position within the company and the seriousness of the charges levelled against her, I find that the respondent placed the applicant on precautionary suspension for a fair reason, as the disciplinary hearing was still pending at that time. 
With reference to the question of prejudice, I agree with the respondent that the applicant has failed to lead any substantial evidence that she suffered prejudice as a result of the precautionary suspension. She claimed to have suffered from depression during that time but failed to present any evidence from a medical professional that she suffered a mental illness due to the suspension. With respect, I agree with the respondent that the applicant may have experienced the uncertainty and stress which every employee who faces precautionary suspension experiences. What is more, the Constitutional Court has held that where an employee is suspended on full pay, cognisable prejudice is ameliorated. I am not convinced that the applicant suffered any prejudice.  
[2022] 5 BALR 504 (CCMA) at 510
In the result and in the light of the Long v SAB case, I find that the respondent’s non-compliance with its HR policy when it failed to provide the applicant with an opportunity to make representations prior to suspending her does not warrant an award of compensation. 
I find that the applicant has failed to discharge the onus of proving that the respondent perpetrated an unfair labour practice when it placed her on precautionary suspension on 11 May 2021. 

Award
The respondent did not perpetrate an unfair labour practice against the applicant when it placed her on precautionary suspension on 11 May 2021. 
The applicant’s application for relief is dismissed. 

The following case was referred to in the above award:


End of Document