



Viera / Cape Town City Ballet [2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: WECT1155-22
Date: 19/06/2022
Before: K Kleinot, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of sections 191(5)(a)(i) and 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Dismissal — Proof of — Employee told to remain at home without pay after refusing to comply with employer’s mandatory Covid-19 vaccination policy and rejecting option of taking regular tests — Dismissal not proved.
Unfair labour practices — Suspension — Employee told to remain at home without pay after refusing to comply with employer’s mandatory vaccination policy and rejecting option of taking regular Covid-19 tests — Suspension fair.

Editor’s Summary


After the respondent introduced a policy of mandatory vaccinations against Covid-19, the applicant, a dance teacher, was told to remain at home until she provided proof of a negative PCR test. After she had stayed at home without pay for several weeks, the applicant referred disputes over an unfair suspension, alternatively an unfair dismissal and claimed that she should be sent back to work. The respondent contended that the applicant had been given a choice of being vaccinated or taking tests and that she had claimed that she was perfectly healthy and had been told by a homeopath that vaccines would reduce her immunity to Covid-19.

The Commissioner noted that the applicant had referred disputes relating to both an alleged unfair labour practice and an unfair dismissal, but the conciliation certificate has referred only to a dismissal dispute. The respondent denied that the applicant had been dismissed; her salary had simply been stopped in terms of the “no work, no pay” principle. If this amounted to a suspension, the respondent had proved that it had consulted with staff, including the applicant and conducted a risk assessment, as required by the applicable directive and the applicant’s objection to vaccinations had been considered. The applicant’s right to bodily integrity had to be weighed against the health and safety of the entire workforce. At the time, vaccinations were available free of charge so her objection to having to pay for PCR tests herself was without merit. The Commissioner held that the suspension was fair and that the applicant had failed to prove that she had been dismissed.

The Commissioner ruled accordingly.

 
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1070

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing 
The matter was set down for arbitration on 14 June 2022 in respect of a dispute relating to an alleged dismissal and unfair labour practice related to mandatory vaccination.
Mr M Wagner, an attorney, represented the respondent Cape Town City Ballet. Ms K Viera was represented by Adv Botha. The proceedings were conducted in Cape Town with Adv Botha joining from Johannesburg via a digital platform. Proceedings were recorded. 
Parties submitted bundles of documents. 
A pre-arbitration minute was submitted but was unsigned. 

Issue in dispute
The issue in dispute is the alleged unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice in terms of section 186(2)(b) of the Labour Relations Act. 

Background to the dispute 
Ms Viera, a rèpètiteur, dance teacher, assistant to choreographers and administrator earning R15 000 per month referred an alleged unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice. 
It is common cause that Ms Viera has been at home without pay from 10 January 2022. 
Further, that the respondent implemented a mandatory vaccination policy on 2 December 2021. 
Prior to this policy, the respondent paid for PCR tests for staff. This was discontinued when the mandatory vaccination policy was implemented. There was consultation with staff including Ms Viera about such policy. Questions and answers were collated and provided to staff. Ms Viera sent a letter to the board listing her concerns. These were noted. 
There were two choices, take up the vaccine or provide three PCR tests per week and the employee would have to bear the cost of such. 
As Ms Viera was unvaccinated as of 10 January 2022 and had not provided a PCR test, she was requested to leave the premises. 
It is the applicant’s contention that she has been placed on an unfair suspension or has been dismissed as she has not been paid and no procedures have been followed.
That the respondent’s condition of obtaining the PCR test is untenable as it is unaffordable. 
That the PCR test stands to be paid by the respondent as it is part of the option provided by the respondent. It was submitted that the respondent is obliged to provide safety equipment in terms of the OHSA and the PCR is no different.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1071
Consequently, the applicant sought to be recalled to work and reimbursed for the time that she was not paid, for the respondent to pay for the PCR test, as well as compensation for the unfair labour practice and unfair dismissal. 

Survey of the evidence

Applicant’s version
Ms K Viera testified that the respondent decided on a mandatory vaccination policy in December 2021, this was with immediate effect. There were meetings and things became difficult given the impasse. Ms Viera confirmed that she provided her opinion about the vaccine in a letter dated 9 January 2022. Ms Viera indicated that she is a healthy person and is treated by a homeopath. She was hesitant and reluctant to put chemicals into her body when there were no long-term studies about the effects or side effects or efficacy of the vaccine. There were negative side effects to the vaccines. Ms Viera stated that her homeopath advised her that the vaccine would lower her immune system, but she indicated that she would not be calling him as a witness. In her letter Ms Viera pointed out that she would not be vaccinated unless there was a mandatory vaccination policy that was legislated. Prior to this, there were protocols in place such as sanitising, wearing masks and practicing social distancing. These were effective and she was able to work. Ms Viera agreed that for the Cape Town City Ballet to perform at Artscape they required the complement to be vaccinated otherwise this could result in shows being cancelled due to members contracting Covid-19. 
Prior to the mandatory vaccination policy, the respondent paid for the PCR tests for staff. Initially she complied with the request to provide PCR test every 72 hours. The respondent paid for such until 24 December 2021. This was prior to staff obtaining the vaccine. 
Upon her return to work on 10 January 2022, as she had not been vaccinated nor furnished a PCR test, she was required to go home. Ms Viera confirmed that she has not returned to work to date. The cost of the PCR test is approximately R6 495 per month, which is unaffordable. Ms Viera stated that if she had complied, she would not have enough to meet her obligations. It was put that had Ms Viera complied, she would have earned a salary and been able to declare a dispute against the respondent to recoup the loss. Ms Viera stated that she was unaware of such an option. In cross-examination it was put that it was her choice to remain unvaccinated and not to comply with undergoing the PCR test. Ms Viera disagreed stating that it was the respondent’s decision to implement a mandatory vaccine policy and provide the alternative of giving a PCR test. Ms Viera stated that she did not comply as she felt that she did not have a choice. 
Ms Viera agreed as a ballet trainer and assistant to choreographers she would from time to time physically touch the dancers. Part of her job also entailed administration. Ms Viera maintained that she could keep her distance from the dancers. 
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1072
Ms Viera confirmed that she ran a business from home making bespoke costumes. This business did not earn anything during Covid-19 and generates approximately R3 000 per month which is paid to her mother.

Respondent’s version 
Ms Turner, the CEO testified: typically, ballets or performances are produced for venues such as Artscape Opera House and other opera houses in the country. There are 36 dancers and supplementary staff, the total staff is 48–50 people. Funding is derived mainly from box office returns. The City of Cape Town gives between 18–20% of their budget and the rest consists of donations. During the Covid-19 lockdown the Cape Town City Ballet did not earn any income.
There were some projects involving film and in December 2021 one production for one night. Dancers were given tasks and a digital platform was used to continue with work. On 7 June 2020 they went back into the studio with strict protocols in place, masks, dancers were separated in the studio, and vinyl masks provided. Four performances were planned in December 2021, but a member of the orchestra contracted Covid-19, and the performances were cancelled. There are normally 75 performances annually.
As a result of the loss of income and not generating income, a retrenchment exercise took place in September 2020. There was also a 25% across the board cut in salary which was implemented in two stages. Ms Viera was not retrenched. Her role is important in that she is the carer of the intellectual property of the ballet company in terms of movement, steps, and choreography. Part of her task is to polish the production so that there is a performance on stage. At times due to the nature of the job, Ms Viera would be in close proximity to the dancers.
The risk assessment was conducted in May 2020, and this changed in terms of the troughs and peaks of the Covid-19 waves and infection rates. Eventually they were able to move more people into the studio. 
On 2 December 2021 the board took a decision to implement a mandatory vaccination policy. Staff had questions about such, these were collated, and responses given to these in a document that was circulated to all staff. This was dated 13 December 2021. This policy was then implemented on 10 January 2022. It was amended in that it initially required a PCR test every 48 hours and this was amended to every 72 hours. The policy outlines the steps to take if there are objections. These included addressing the CEO about the basis for the objection, whether there were medical or religious grounds and Cape Town City Ballet undertook to attempt to reasonably accommodate the employee. Ms Viera submitted a letter reflecting that she would not take up the vaccine.
Prior to the letter, consultations were held with staff on 15 December 2021. There were three separate consultations with Ms Viera after her letter of 9 January 2022. Correspondence dated 31 January 2022 was then sent to Ms Viera summarising the number of consultations, 15 December 2021, 13 January 2022 as well as 21 January 2022. The letter states that  
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1073
  no dismissal has occurred and that she would be paid until the end of January 2022, after which “a no work no pay” principle would take effect. Working from home was not feasible. As the position was necessary, an interim rèpètiteur had to be appointed. The letter reiterated that they would like her to return to work if Ms Viera complied and either provided a vaccination certificate, or a negative PCR test every 72 hours at her own cost, or a medical exemption certificate stating why she could not be vaccinated.
The policy of mandatory vaccination was taken by the board in consultation with a few doctors who gave their time to the board. The alternative of providing PCR tests every 72 hours and bearing the cost of such was in line with the OHSA as the respondent had an obligation to keep the workplace safe.
Ms Turner agreed that an employer is responsible to provide safety equipment to staff such as a fire fighter. Ms Turner confirmed that the respondent ensured that sanitisers were available at their cost. 
When the respondent paid for the PCR tests for all staff, the vaccine was not available for those staff members under 35. When the vaccine became available staff started to take up the vaccine. Things progressed towards being able to perform and on 2 December 2021 the policy for mandatory vaccination was taken. It was necessary to implement the policy as it is important for performing because if a member of the complement has Covid-19 the performance is then cancelled, this is what occurred resulting in a loss of box office income. 
It was put that the board wanted the staff to be vaccinated which is why they did not continue to pay for the PCR test. Ms Turner disagreed in that the vaccine was not available until 23 April 2021. The board did consider Ms Viera’s letter but did not accept it. Ms Turner reiterated that she afforded Ms Viera an opportunity to provide medical evidence, this was not done. It was put that the information cited were from credible sources such as the UK government site. Ms Turner stated that she was not certain about the information. Their Covid-19 officer advised them. Ms Turner confirmed that the Covid-19 officer was not a medical doctor but added that she had read extensively and consulted with medical professionals although not virologists. 
Management was designated as an acceptable level of risk as they sat in individual offices and were not in contact with staff. Ms Turner added that, as she is vaccinated, her risk was deemed to be acceptable. Ms Turner stated that in her understanding being vaccinated minimised the risk to others. Ms Turner agreed that she contracted Covid and spread it to her husband. It was put that there was a study showing that there was no difference in terms of viral load and that on this basis mandatory vaccination policies should be reconsidered. Ms Turner stated that she was unaware of such but that there were probably other studies showing the contrary. As they were required to look after all staff, mandatory vaccination was justified. 
In cross-examination it was put that the cost of the PCR test was unaffordable and as such there was no choice, this in fact reflected that the  
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1074
  respondent forced staff to have the vaccine. This was denied. Ms Turner indicated that it was not feasible, nor could the respondent afford to cover the costs of PCR tests for all staff. The vaccine was free of charge. The respondent had an obligation to provide a safe workplace for all staff. Currently only one person has not been vaccinated. It was put that the respondent was obliged to make the workplace safe for employees and that it had to assist the employee to make it safe. Ms Turner disagreed indicating that the respondent had a duty to make the workplace safe for all employees and had done so. 

Analysis of the evidence
This matter was referred as an alleged unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice. The unsigned pre-arbitration minute characterises the dispute as an alleged unfair labour practice. This was however not signed by the parties and is of no effect. The certificate of outcome specifies an alleged unfair dismissal. It is trite law that the Commissioner must determine the true nature of the dispute. 
The referral 7.11 refers to unbearable conditions created by the requirement to provide a PCR test every 72 hours as this is unaffordable and further that the employee has been at home without income. It was argued that by virtue of remaining at home without pay that as Ms Viera is unable to afford the PCR test and has exercised her right not to be vaccinated that this amounted to a dismissal.
Evidence from the respondent in their correspondence to Ms Viera specifies that there has been no dismissal. During Ms Viera’s evidence it did not emerge that she had resigned due to the intolerable condition created by the mandatory vaccination policy. For a dismissal to occur there must be a severing of the employment relationship. In this instance there is no resignation, and the respondent has also not commenced any process to terminate Ms Viera’s employment. It was argued that by virtue of the no work no pay principle that this amounted to a dismissal. 
To answer this question the alleged unfair suspension must be examined.

“Section 186(2) ‘Unfair labour practice’, means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving – 

(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;
(b) the unfair suspension of an employer or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
(c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
(d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure identified in that Act”.
The applicable subsection in dispute is section 186(2)(b). The respondent argued that this section was not applicable in that there was no suspension and that Ms Viera had not complied with the alternative presented to her.  
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1075

  The applicant argued that the respondent had an obligation to assist the applicant in meeting the alternative by funding the PCR test that was required. The applicant is able and willing to perform her duties but is not allowed entrance due to her not being able to afford the PCR test.

Suspensions fall within two categories, suspension pending a disciplinary hearing and suspension as form of discipline. The approach followed in the CCMA case of Kok v Ndaka FSW2448-21 is compelling and makes provision for a broader interpretation of the definition of suspension. In the City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality v SALGBC and others [2021] ZALCHJB 53, the court provided for a less restrictive interpretation to give effect to section 23 of the Constitution. The test for determining whether a suspension is unfair is one of fairness. 
To answer this question regard is had to the process followed by the respondent. In terms of the Consolidated Direction of June 2021 read with the guidelines which reflect that the employer is obliged to:
Conduct a risk assessment of the workplace;
develop (or amend) a plan outlining taking into account employee’s constitutional rights to bodily integrity and freedom of religion, belief an opinion;
implement protective measures at the workplace;
identify measures regarding vaccination of employees;
consult trade union or health and safety committee/employees on the plan;
notify all employees of the plan and the manner in which it intends to implement it;
educate employees of the dangers of Covid-19 and measures to prevent the spread, as well as vaccinations available, benefits, possible side effects of the vaccination;
give employees time off to be vaccinated;
inform employees who are required to vaccinate of the obligation to do so;
inform employees that they have the right to refuse, ask for the reasons and counsel the employee;
if the refusal is for medical grounds, refer the employee to a medical practitioner;
take steps to reasonably accommodate the employee as far as reasonably practicable. 
Evidence was that a risk assessment was performed. Applicant argued that her constitutional rights were not considered. The evidence was that protective measures were implemented at the respondent, distancing of dancers in studio, sanitising and wearing of masks as well as staff undergoing PCR tests and paying for such. Ms Turner’s evidence that there were consultations with staff in general was not challenged. Nor was her evidence that there were at least three consultations with Ms Viera about her position on vaccination. An information sheet was circulated  
[2022] 10 BALR 1069 (CCMA) at 1076
  amongst staff derived from their questions which were then answered relating to amongst others the need for vaccines, the law, and the efficacy of vaccines. The vaccination policy made provision for objections. Ms Viera objected to taking the vaccine. This was placed before the board. 
It was argued that Ms Viera was not individually assessed, nor were her concerns considered and that the respondent did not reasonably accommodate her. Ms Viera trains and interacts with the dancers in her position. This requires physical contact. The respondent indicated that this could not be performed remotely and had employed a temporary rèpètiteur in the interim. The administrative portion of the position can be performed remotely but this is not the core duty of the rèpètiteur which is teaching, training dancers, and working with the choreographer to ensure the dancers are at performance level. There is also an operational requirement in that the various theatres, such as Artscape, the requirement is that the complement be fully vaccinated. If a staff member contracts Covid-19 the performance is cancelled, and this results in a loss of income, which as per the evidence of Ms Turner occurred. It was clear that the argument presented by Ms Viera that she relied on natural immunity, a homeopathic perspective on treatment of Covid-19 and concerns about the long-term effect of the vaccine was not accepted by the board. Ms Viera’s submissions were considered, in a consultation Ms Viera was advised that if there were medical reasons for her refusal to vaccinate these could be submitted to the board. Further medical submissions for not taking up the vaccine were not tendered.
This it was argued revealed discrimination based on bodily integrity and a lack of an individual assessment. It is Ms Viera’s constitutional right to rely on bodily integrity. This must be balanced with the health and safety of the entire work force at the respondent. Although numerous references were made to websites supporting this view there was no medical evidence placed before the arbitration. The evidence was that the board consulted medical practitioners and accepted the view that vaccinations were effective in minimising hospitalisation and long Covid-19. This does reveal an assessment of the argument made by Ms Viera. Further the respondent took account of her job, and it was apparent that all reasonable accommodations in terms of work had been made. Whether discrimination took place or not is not before me and cannot be addressed in this award. 
As the PCR test was unaffordable it was argued that the respondent had to bear these costs in terms of the OHSA. The OHSA section 8(1) reflects:

“General duties of employers to their employees – (1) Every employer shall provide and maintain, as far as is reasonably practicable, a working environment that is safe and without risk to the health of his employees”. 

  Section 8(2): 

“Without derogating from the generality of an employer’s duties under subsection (1), the matters to which those duties refer include in particular – 


(a)  . . .
(b) taking such steps as may be reasonably practicable to eliminate or mitigate any hazard or potential hazard to the safety or health of employees, before resorting to personal protective equipment.” 

Section 14: 

“General duties of employees at work – Every employee shall at work – 

(a) . . .
(b) as regards any duty or requirement imposed on his employer or any other person by this Act, co-operate with such employer or person to enable that duty or requirement to be performed or complied with”. 
The respondent bore the costs of the PCR tests until the vaccines were available to all. The evidence was that the respondent could not continue to bear the cost as it could not afford it for the entire staff. The respondent has implemented social distancing, wearing of masks, and sanitising to attempt to eliminate or mitigate any hazard. The question is whether a PCR test constitutes personal protective equipment. Personal protective equipment is provided because of danger or perilous conditions as a result of producing or manufacturing or dealing with fire as in the case of a fire-fighter or armed criminals as in the case of a policeman, in the pursuit of the work conducted. In this case the virus is not a result of production or manufacturing at the workplace. It is a contagion which affects the whole world. It is not that Ms Viera requires the PCR test to perform her work, like a fire-fighter who by virtue of his/her job enters burning buildings. This is the alternative to not having the vaccine, to keep the staff at the workplace safe that is to provide a PCR test every 72 hours and is not personal protective equipment.
Argument was that by compelling an employee to spend a third of their income on the PCR test this interfered with her remuneration and there was no consent for such. This was not a deduction in terms of the BCEA. Ms Viera indicated in her evidence that she was unaware that she could comply and seek reimbursement either through the CCMA or other forums. 
This shows that Ms Viera could have complied but elected not to do so. The consequence was to remain home without pay as she was not tendering her services. This was not unfair. Further this does not establish a dismissal to date as there has been no resignation tendered nor has there been any process leading to a termination.

Award
The applicant, Ms Viera, has not discharged the onus of establishing a dismissal. 
The suspension of Ms Viera was for a fair reason.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document