



South African Transport and Allied Workers Union obo Selepe / South African Maritime Safety Authority [2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: WECT5218-23
Date: 19/12/2023
Before: W Van Niekerk, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 10(6)(aA) of the EEA
Discrimination — Equal pay for equal work — Black employee claiming that offer of promotional appointment was discriminatory as salary offered was less than white colleague — Unfair discrimination not proved because employer applied remuneration policy to all newly appointed employees, irrespective of race or sex.

Editor’s Summary


After being offered a promotional post as a duty controller by the respondent, a black woman, the applicant employee learned that her salary would be less than that if a white female in the same post and claimed that she was a victim of unfair discrimination on the ground of race. The respondent contended that its remuneration policy was objectively applied to all job applicants, and provided that all new appointments would be at the entry level of the applicable salary band.

The Commissioner noted that the dispute was not about the respondent’s grading policy, but was a claim for equal pay for work of equal value, as permitted by the EEA. However, to prove her case, the employee had to show that the policy discriminated against her as a member of a group. The chosen comparator had been recruited in 2016, two years before the remuneration policy was adopted. That some employee had benefited from a more generous appointment policy earlier did not mean that those appointed later were victims of unfair discrimination: the issue was rather whether the current remuneration policy was applied to all employees, which it was. There was no evidence to show that the policy had been applied unequally against black or female employees. That the employee was dissatisfied with the salary she had been offered did not make the offer discriminatory. The respondent could not therefor be said to have discriminated against the applicant.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of representation
The matter came before me as an arbitration hearing on 4 September and 21 November 2023 at the Cape Town offices of the CCMA. 
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 333
The applicant, Maphuti Selepe, was present and was represented by Sellonyana Matuba, a shop steward of trade union SATAWU. 
The respondent, South African Maritime Safety Authority, was represented by Phumlani Nhlabathi, its ER Manager.
The hearing was digitally recorded, conducted in English.

Background and details of the dispute
The respondent is a state institution established by an Act of Parliament to regulate and oversee all maritime safety in South Africa. The applicant was offered the position of Duty Controller on 10 October 2022, having previously held the position of Assistant Duty Controller. 
The applicant referred a dispute of unfair discrimination: Equal Pay for Work of Equal Value to the CCMA, claiming that she had been offered the position at a salary inferior to a white female colleague fulfilling the very same position into which she was to be appointed. Therefore, the claim of unequal pay for work of equal value was based on the prohibited ground of race.
The matter is important as it relates to the impact of the policy and practice of a national state institution.
The applicant submitted into evidence document bundles A (paginated 1–123) and B (paginated 1–16).
The respondent submitted into evidence a document bundle C, paginated 1–86. 
Written closing arguments were agreed to be submitted by 28 November 2023. 
Section 138 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (as amended) (“LRA”) requires me to provide brief reasons for the arbitration award. While I have considered all of the evidence submitted and presented to me, I have only included that which is pertinent and relevant to this arbitration award.

The Issue to be decided
Whether the respondent subjected the applicant to unfair discrimination.

Summary of submissions and arguments

Common cause facts
The facts of the case were largely not disputed, as the parties concurred that the submitted documentary evidence provided an accurate reflection of the information at hand.
At the time of the commencement of the arbitration hearing the applicant had not accepted the employment offer, but had subsequently done so after it was ruled that the date of the cause of action was 10 October 2022. 
The identified comparator, Michelle van der Westhuizen, is now understood to have since left the respondent’s employ, but that has no bearing  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 334
  on the relevant information related to this case since the evidence and testimony was valid at the time the offer was made to the applicant on 10 October 2023.
The respondent’s Remuneration Policy is the only policy used for employing and promoting employees. There is no automatic promotion practice whereby salaries are increased either automatically or by discretion.
The respondent’s grading system was introduced during 2018, which regulates salary levels within a job grade at the levels of entry, midpoint and uppermost.
Michelle van der Westhuizen was employed during 2016 prior to the introduction of the respondent’s grading system.

Applicant’s case
The applicant argued that the act of making her an offer with an inferior salary level compared to her comparator, a white woman who was incumbent in the position was an act of unfair discrimination on the basis of unequal pay for work of equal value on the prohibited ground of race. The applicant argued that the policy of the respondent caused the unfair discrimination to continue since it did not cater for the disparity to be eliminated.

Sellonyana Matuba
Sellonyana Matuba, Shop Steward and Secretary within SAMSA, testified that he worked with the applicant as an Assistant Duty Controller for maritime search and rescue. The offer discriminated against the applicant, which she subsequently had to accept or face not being able to be promoted into the position of Duty Controller. The comparator, Michelle van der Westhuizen, received a salary of R50 045,78 cost to company per month, whereas the applicant’s salary was R37 157,02 cost to company per month.
The applicant’s role is the same as that of the comparator, working shift work, public holidays and Sundays. The premium allowances for those shifts were based on the hourly rate, which led to a discrepancy of being paid R3 000 instead of R6 000 per month for premium allowances. The applicant is a black female, the comparator is a white female. The respondent subjected them to different thirteenth cheque benefits. The applicant’s salary offer included a thirteenth cheque in her salary, the comparator received the thirteenth cheque over and above the basic salary.
The issue of unfair discrimination was discussed in correspondence with the respondent, which they did not deny, and they acknowledged the disparities. They stated that it was an historical issue, and at other times they stated that it was a policy issue and that therefore there was no discrimination.
Three white employees were recruited in the past from outside the respondent without job experience, but the black employees were subjected to different criteria, the white employees were paid above the midpoint.  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 335

  The respondent claimed that the salary offered to the applicant was in line with its policy. But that policy must be corrected if it discriminates against employees. After a grievance was raised regarding the issue, the respondent stated that the salary bands did not constitute discrimination.

But there was discrimination. The respondent knew that the salary discrepancy existed. White employees were placed above the midpoint. The respondent hid behind the remuneration policy. Section 7 of the remuneration policy applied to promotion, but the respondent’s policy did not define promotion as an automatic function within a position, yet this section was supposedly implemented to deal with the applicant’s matter. The promotion policy is not defined because it does not exist. The policy is therefore used to discriminate against the applicant. 
The bargaining forum for salary negotiation from 2020 addressed the issue of this disparity, but the respondent has not moved on the issue of discrimination, and again during 2022 postponed dealing with the issues. The respondent should have appointed black people at above the midpoint just like they did with white employees. There is no willingness to address the issues.
Under cross-examination, he confirmed that he was part of the team attempting to rectify the salary disparity issue, which had not progressed past where it was during 2019, and nothing was implemented to adjust salaries by formula. Salary disparity was central to this dispute, which related to equal pay for work of equal value. The applicant and the comparator performed the same job, under the same working conditions, so they must be paid the same salary. Salary disparities affect many employees, but this dispute is about the applicant’s case. 
When it was put to him that there could no unfair discrimination on unequal pay since at the time of the offer there was no pay yet, Matuba stated that the offer of employment in itself unfairly discriminated against the applicant. The respondent knew that the comparator earned above the midpoint, and on the basis of race there was unfair discrimination. He conceded that the salary offer was made on 10 October 2022, which was not accepted at that time. 
He conceded that the comparator, Michelle van der Westhuizen, was offered a salary which was above the current midpoint level upon appointment as Duty Controller during 2016. Grievances had been filed about this before, and another colleague had referred a dispute to the labour court. The applicant was not yet employed with the respondent at the time. There was no salary adjustment until 2023, and the applicant is skilled as she previously worked for Transnet. She should have been appointed at the midpoint level salary or above. 
He insisted that race played a role in the offer to the applicant though conceded that he did not know the circumstances of van der Westhuizen’s appointment. He further conceded that she was appointed because of her skill. Additionally, he pointed out that the two white employees employed before van der Westhuizen were also appointed at a salary level above the midpoint. The tendency was that white employees appointed from outside the respondent’s organisation were paid above the midpoint.  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 336
Previously, a coloured male was employed at a salary level above others who worked at the respondent for more than ten years. The respondent corrected that situation after complaints were made and his salary was then adjusted to a level above the complainant. The discrimination was not only in relation to white people discriminate [sic].
When challenged he conceded that the comparator salary payslip was not obtained legally, he stated that a whistle-blower provided the payslip of the comparator. It was allegedly found in a copier machine, which somebody took a screenshot of. But he knew the information even before that because of his involvement in the salary disparity project. This kind of information sometimes even comes from management. As shop stewards they come upon such information. Correspondence indicates that there are salary disparities, even by the respondent’s own response to the union.
He conceded that the applicant signed the employment contract for the position of Duty Controller on 19 July 2023. He argued that evidence shows unfair discrimination on the basis of race. The respondent must show that the offer was fair, not irrational and not discriminatory. The respondent committed an act of unfair discrimination. There is no justification for inequality at the workplace, the remuneration policy cannot justify that. 

Maphuti Selepe
Maphuti Selepe testified that she was employed on 1 January 2021 as Assistant Duty Controller. She had a diploma in maritime studies, military basic training in the SA Navy, she worked as a navigating officer, she worked at Transnet as a trainee tug master assisting vessels into and out of port. 
Her current position as Duty Controller coordinated search and rescue, as the only maritime rescue coordinating centre in South Africa. A newly appointed person could only do her job if they studied maritime search and rescue, supported by appropriate work experience. The job tasks are the same as an Assistant Duty Controller, except for making final decisions, which is what the Duty Controller does.
The salary offer was unfair, discriminated against her, the offer was made to her when she was still in her previous job as an applicant. The position was advertised, she applied for the job, she was short listed, went through interviews, and was offered the position. The recruitment and selection process was the same for internal and external candidates. She did not consider herself to have been promoted because she went through the same process of recruitment and selection as external candidates. Human Capital informed her that the respondent did not have an automatic promotion policy, and therefore she had to compete with others for this position. Section 7 of the remuneration policy, applied to promotion, did not speak to her situation because she was not promoted. The process was not one of promotion because she had to apply for the higher position. The post was advertised internally and externally. There is no promotion policy. 
The Employment Equity Act protects applicants. The salary offered was right at the entry of the salary band. The respondent did not take her  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 337
  qualifications or her skills or performance into account when making this offer.
Under cross-examination she confirmed that the relief she sought was for the CCMA to order the respondent to take all employment elements into account for a fair salary offer to be made. The comparator evidence was provided to guide the CCMA when making the ruling on the correct salary taking into account past experience and qualifications, in terms of the salary band.
When it was put to her that she did not testify of being discriminated against because of being black, she stated that there was evidence of such allegations in email correspondence with the respondent where white colleagues earned more than the midpoint of the salary band. She conceded that she did not testify of any other person being paid an amount because of their race and that she did not testify about the comparator, Michelle van der Westhuizen.

Respondent’s case
The respondent argued that the remuneration policy was objectively applied to all job applicants and therefore the salary offered at the entry level of the salary band was in line with that policy. There was no unfair discrimination on the basis of race, the applicant was employed according to the respondent’s remuneration policy in line with the advertised position, and the applicant did not prove the existence of unfair discrimination, nor that there was unequal pay for work of equal value. 

Masiye Pilusa
Masiye Pilusa, employed as a Human Capital Consultant, testified that she has covered HR generalist functions since 3 July 2013, conducting recruitment, she was highly experienced, having completed many recruitment processes for respondent. She was involved in the applicant’s recruitment and appointment. She interviewed the applicant for the Duty Controller position, which was advertised, the applicant was shortlisted, interviews were held with the union present. 
The applicant was the recommended candidate, a salary and appointment offer was made, the applicant was unhappy about some of the contractual terms, and she accepted and signed the contract later. SATAWU corresponded on applicant’s behalf, raising issues. The remuneration policy in section 7.1 provides for an increase to the next grade if earning below that level. The applicant moved from C2 to C4 position. Duty Controllers are employed at the C4 position, whose entry level salary was at the lower level of the band. The remuneration policy was applied, and it was not discriminatory against the applicant. The salary offer would have been the same for anybody else in the respondent’s employ. 
She conceded that the remuneration policy was unfair, since her own salary was also not in line with where it should be. Human Capital consultants were employed from outside the respondent’s organisation at a higher level than her. She had to teach them what she knew to do their job since their industry experience and knowledge was inferior to hers. But  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 338
  she insisted that the salary offered to the applicant was based on the remuneration policy, not because of the applicant’s race. The process of reviewing the remuneration policy is to take it to the bargaining forum after obtaining comment from employees. 
Under cross-examination she conceded that when Michelle van der Westhuizen was appointed as a Duty Controller during 2016 there was no job grading at the time. She was not involved in compiling the salary offer to van der Westhuizen. She conceded that van der Westhuizen’s experience must have been relative to the position of Duty Controller since she was shortlisted as she would have met the requirements of the position.
At that time appointments were made on the discretion of the line manager after engaging with the executive head as to the offer. There were no salary bands prior to 2018. Now the remuneration policy is applied. The salary band levels of lower, middle and upper in each job category were introduced later. Referring to section 7.2, all appointees were employed at the lower level since the new salary bands were introduced. She confirmed that the remuneration policy was not fair since external people are appointed at a higher salary level.
There was no automatic promotion policy within a position. Promotion was applied according to advertised positions to be applied for. If a person moves lower to higher that is promotion using the recruitment policy process. Recruitment was done without reference to any promotion policy. The remuneration policy guides all appointments and salaries. When the salary offer was made to the applicant, the respondent did not consider skills, experience and qualification. The offer was made on the basis of the remuneration policy stipulating that a new appointee must be employed on the lowest salary band in a grade. She insisted that this was not unfair since the remuneration policy was correctly applied. 
She conceded that any policy that unfairly discriminated against an employee was unfair. She was familiar with the bargaining forum and its committees, but she had no knowledge of the committees’ actual work content. She received an email sent on 11 October 2022 wherein issues were raised to be resolved. The issues of conditions of employment were resolved, and medical aid was still with the bargaining unit, while remuneration was still outstanding. 
The job profile matrix was used to align the offer with the jobs advertised. The applicant had a National Diploma in maritime studies, experience related to a job matrix of five years (two years at a supervisory level). 

Analysis of arguments and submissions
At the heart of this dispute is whether the application of the respondent’s remuneration policy in effect indirectly discriminated against a group of employees, in this case the applicant being one of such a group. It is important to note that this dispute is not about the grading policy of the respondent, but rather the application of that policy in relation to the applicant’s offer of employment in the position of Duty Controller at a salary level inferior to an identified comparator, and whether the effect  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 339
  thereof amounted to unfair discrimination on the basis of (un)equal pay for work of equal value on the basis of race.
A claim of unfair discrimination on the basis of equal pay for work of equal value in terms of section 6(4) of the EEA requires a comparator to substantiate the claim. “A difference in terms and conditions of employment of employees with the same employer performing the same or substantially the same work or work of equal value that is directly or indirectly based on any one or more of the grounds listed in Subsection (1) is unfair discrimination”.
The law on unfair discrimination and the test for unfair discrimination is outlined hereunder.
In the preamble to the Constitution states the purpose of adopting the Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic:

  Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights; Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law; improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of nations.

Section 9 of the Constitution, the Equality Rights section, confirms that all are equal before the law, and the section enjoins the State to not unfairly discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone. That would include any organ or institution of the state, which the respondent is. 
This right to equality is expressed in workplace law in the Employment Equity Act 55 of 1998 (“EEA”), as amended: 

“The purpose of this Act is to achieve equity in the workplace by— (a) promoting equal opportunity and fair treatment in employment through the elimination of unfair discrimination; and (b) implementing affirmative action measures to redress the disadvantages in employment experienced by designated groups, in order to ensure their equitable representation in all occupational levels in the workforce.”.

Section 5(2) of the EEA stipulates that: “Every employer must take steps to promote equal opportunity in the workplace by eliminating unfair discrimination in any employment policy or practice.” 
In the judgment of Harksen v Lane NO and others (CCT9/97) [1997] ZACC 12 (CC); 1997 (11) BCLR 1489; 1998 (1) SA 300 (CC) (7 October 1997) the test for unfair discrimination is settled case law, particularly regarding a law or a policy: 
Does the provision differentiate between people or categories of people? If so, does the differentiation bear a rational connection to a legitimate government purpose? If it does not then there is a violation. Even if it does bear a rational connection, it might nevertheless amount to discrimination.
Does the differentiation amount to unfair discrimination? This requires a two stage analysis:
If the differentiation amounts to “discrimination”, does it amount to “unfair discrimination”? If it has been found to have been on a specified ground, then unfairness will be presumed. If on an unspecified ground, unfairness will have to be established by the complainant. The test of unfairness focuses primarily on the impact of the discrimination on the complainant and others in his or her situation.
If the discrimination is found to be unfair then a determination will have to be made as to whether the provision can be justified as rational. 
In order to prove her case, the applicant had to show that the remuneration policy of the respondent in effect indirectly unfairly discriminated against a group of people.
On the evidence before me, it was not disputed that Michelle van der Westhuizen was employed as a Duty Controller at what was testified by Pilusa to be the midpoint level of the salary band for Duty Controllers, while the applicant was offered the same position at the entry level of the salary band. This in effect meant that a white female was paid substantially more per annum than a black female when they performed the same tasks on different shifts. 
However, the undisputed evidence showed that van der Westhuizen was employed during 2016, a few years before the applicant’s employment, and before the change in the respondent’s remuneration policy in 2018. 
The applicant and Matuba testified that the work performed by the applicant and van der Westhuizen was the same, and therefore no difference was proven as a valid reason for the pay differentiation. The argument proffered for the pay differential by the respondent and its witness, Pilusa, was that the remuneration policy was objectively applied equally to all employees and that the offer of the position Duty Controller at the entry level was the common practice of the respondent. 
Matuba conceded that the comparator, van der Westhuizen was employed for her skill during 2016. The remuneration policy changed the way employees were appointed from 2018. However, the fact that employees benefited from being employed prior to the implementation of the remuneration policy and its grading system in 2018 did not make that differentiation one of unfair discrimination. By extension, the fact that van der Westhuizen was white and the applicant black did not mean that simply because the applicant was black she was paid differently. The question must be asked  
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 341
  whether the remuneration policy applied from 2018 was equally applied to all new employees, and on the evidence before me, it was.
Applying the legal principle of sina qua non (the “but for” test), the question must be asked as to whether, if for no other reason, when applying the remuneration policy, the respondent’s employees would have been paid the same. The respondent steadfastly argued that it applied its own policy on a fair and objective basis to all applicants for employment on an equal basis, which was not disputed. It was the effect of the application which the applicant found to be discriminatory. 
However, although there was no difference in experience or duties between the applicant and her comparator, the only reason the applicant was paid less than her comparator was that the respondent’s remuneration policy changed after the comparator was appointed, which in effect caused the disparity of salary. While there was evidence of discrepancies in salary where employees employed prior to the remuneration policy ended up being paid more than new employees, there was no evidence that the application of the remuneration policy in its application was discriminatory.
Applying the question whether the policy itself in its application unfairly discriminated against an entire group of people on a listed ground which the applicant alleged was race, there was no evidence that the remuneration policy in and of itself discriminated unfairly against black people through its application. The fact that the applicant was offered the position of Duty Controller according to that policy did not render the offer to be one related to unfair discrimination – unequal pay for work of equal value. She was not offered the position at a salary lower than her comparator on the basis of race. 
The answer must therefore be that the remuneration policy framework in and of itself did not discriminate against the applicant. The fact that she was dissatisfied at being employed at the entry level band of her job grade did not make the offer one of unfair discrimination. 
In its cross-examination of Matuba, the respondent established that a mechanism of negotiation existed to address this anomalous disparity via the bargaining forum. It was the length of time taken for the changes to be effected that caused the union and its members to be dissatisfied, but that did not mean that the remuneration policy, applied objectively to all employees being appointed, discriminated by its application. 
On the basis of the above reasoning, I find that although there was differentiation between the salaries of the applicant and her comparator it was because of a change in the remuneration policy after the appointment of the comparator. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that the applicant was subjected to unfair discrimination by virtue of unequal pay for work of equal value, and certainly not on the basis of race. 
Therefore, I find that the respondent did not unfairly discriminate against the applicant. 

Award
The applicant was not subjected to unfair discrimination. 
[2024] 3 BALR 332 (CCMA) at 342

The following case was referred to in the above award:


End of Document