



SACTWU obo Ndlangisa & others / Prowood Clothing [2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: National Bargaining Council for the Clothing Manufacturing Industry, Durban
Case No: U/7/573/3/05
Date: 28/06/2005
Before: M Lyster, Arbitrator
Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA

Keywords


Short time — When permissible — Unilateral implementation of short time permissible if permitted by collective agreement or as alternative to retrenchment.
Unfair labour practice — Short time — Unilateral implementation of short time not covered by statutory definition of unfair labour practice.

Editor’s Summary


During consultation over possible retrenchments, the respondent announced that it intended to place its entire workforce on short time. The applicant union claimed that the respondent’s failure to consult before implementing short time constituted an unfair labour practice.

The arbitrator noted that a dispute over short time is not covered by the statutory definition of “unfair labour practice”. A dispute over short time could not be accommodated in the provision relating to unfair suspension, as it was clear that suspension in that context referred to suspension imposed as a disciplinary sanction. None of the other provisions of the definition applied. The council accordingly lacked jurisdiction to conciliate or arbitrate the dispute.

The commissioner pointed out, however, that short time may not be imposed unilaterally by an employer unless it is permitted to do so by agreement with the employees concerned. While the matter could have been referred as a dispute concerning the interpretation and application of the council’s main agreement, which agreement did not cater for short time in the case of employers, such as the respondent, in “Non-Metro” areas. If short time had been introduced as an alternative to retrenchment, and the employees refused to accept it, they could be dismissed. A dispute could then be referred to the Labour Court. The commissioner suggested further that, although disputes over short time are not catered for in the LRA, it might be possible to refer such disputes to the High Court or the Labour Court as an alleged infringement of the employees’ constitutional right to fair labour practices. Either way, the council lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Background, representation and issues

The arbitration took place at the Bargaining Council offices in Durban on 23 June 2005. The applicants were represented by a SACTWU official Mr P Pakkies, and the respondent by its Manager, Mr Vijay.

 
[2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI) at 937

Issue

The matter was referred as a ULP dispute, concerning short time. The referral form read as follows:

“The company sent all workers on indefinite short time without contacting their union” 


The relief that the applicants sought in the referral form was: 

“Workers should be paid their lost hours”. 


Submissions by the parties

The applicants’ representative, Mr Pakkies, submitted that an unfair labour practice had taken place, for the following reasons: 

There had been section 189 (Act 66 of 1995) discussions, concerning possible retrenchments, between the company and the union on Friday 25 February, and 14 people were selected for retrenchment. 
On the following Monday (28 February), without notification to the union, the whole factory had been given notice that they would be placed on short time.
First, 40 or so workers were sent on short time on that Monday, and then the day after more workers were sent on short time, and then the balance of the workers were sent on short time later in that week. 
The union had not been consulted about this and the workers had not been told when they should return to work.
He said that the company was morally obliged to have told the union on Friday 25 February about the impending short time. 
He conceded that before the end of February 2005, the workers had been called back to work, save for the 14 who had been retrenched. 
He said that this constituted an unfair labour practice ie the failure of the company to consult with the union, and the failure of the company to tell the workers as to how long they would be on short time. 

At this stage, I intervened and explained to Mr Pakkies that the definition of Unfair Labour Practice (“ULP”) in the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“LRA”) did not include this type of dispute, and that accordingly, the Bargaining Council did not have jurisdiction to deal with the matter. 

The LRA defines an ULP as follows: 

 (2) “Unfair labour practice means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving–

  (a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation or training of an employee or relating to the provision of benefits to an employee;

  (b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;

  (c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and

  (d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.”


 
[2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI) at 938

It is clear that a dispute relating to short time does not fall into the definition of an unfair labour practice, as understood by section 186. The reference to “suspension” in section 186(2)(b) above is clearly a reference to suspension imposed as a sanction for misconduct. None of the other sub-clauses of section 186 can accommodate a dispute relating to short time. 

I spent some time explaining that I was not empowered by the LRA to arbitrate a dispute about an ULP, if the unfair conduct of the employer complained of, related to short time. The applicants’ representative nevertheless wanted me to make a finding that the company had committed an unfair labour practice by failing to notify the union that it intended to place the workers on short time. I explained to him that I had no powers to do so, and that if I had issued an award ordering the company to negotiate with the union about short time, that award would have been reviewable by the Labour Court. 

At that point, the applicants’ representative said that I was obliged to mediate a settlement between the union and the company on the question of the duty to consult about short time. I explained to the applicants’ representative that unless the respondent agreed to such a mediation process, I could not take it upon myself to begin a process of mediation between the company and the union about the respondent’s relationship with the union. Certainly, I could not undertake such a role in my capacity of arbitration panellist for the Bargaining Council. The negotiation of a collective agreement, or a recognition agreement, or a procedural agreement, between an employer and a trade union is not an issue that this Bargaining Council is obliged to undertake. 

Analysis of submissions

It is clear that the definition of an unfair labour practice does not include a dispute about short time. Accordingly, I do not have any power in law, to arbitrate this dispute. The Bargaining Council should have picked this up when the dispute was referred and again when the dispute was conciliated. A certificate of non-resolution should not have been issued, and the parties should have been advised that the Council did not have jurisdiction to deal with the dispute in the manner in which it was referred. 

For the benefit of the parties, I shall set out hereunder what the provisions of the Main Agreement are relating to short time, and what remedies an applicant ie an employee or a union, has if he/it has a dispute about short time. I shall deal with the situation that pertains in the Metro and Non-Metro areas. 

Short time is a fundamental incursion into the employment relationship. Essentially, the employee, whilst still in the employ of the employer, temporarily forfeits his or her right to a wage or salary. Accordingly, it is not something that can be unilaterally imposed by an employer, who may be experiencing temporary financial difficulties, or a fall off in trading. If an employer is not to fall foul of the law, short time is an issue that must be regulated by collective agreement between parties, or by individual agreement with an effected employee. In the case of collective agreement, this is usually incorporated in the Main Agreement of a Bargaining Council, such as the agreement that exists in this Bargaining Council’s Consolidated Main Agreement for Metro Areas. Where short time is implemented in respect of individual employees, this usually takes  
[2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI) at 939
place after agreement with the employee, as an alternative to section 189 retrenchments. The key issue is agreement ie an employer who is going through difficult financial times, may not simply send employees home until business picks up.

In the recent LAC case of CWIU & others v Algorax (Pty) Ltd [2003] 11 BLLR 1081 (LAC) the court said (obiter) as follows: 

“Where an employer seeks to reduce costs in his business and demands that his employees agree to work short time, that employer has genuine operational requirements justifying the working of short time but, without the employees’ consent, he is not entitled to require them to work short time. He can demand that they work short time but they are not under any obligation to comply with his demand.”


What happens if there is a dispute about short time? Section 7 of the Consolidated Main Agreement of this Bargaining Council (Metro Areas) reads as follows: 

 “7. SHORT TIME.

 1. Where short time is being or has been introduced . . . any employee who attends at the establishment on any day shall, unless he has prior to such date received notice that his services will not be required on such day, be employed for at least half a day or be paid half a days wages in lieu thereof. 

 2. If, owing to slackness of trade, it is found impossible to work full time, short time shall be worked by distributing the work evenly as far as practicable, in any section or department concerned. 

 3. When it is necessary to introduce short time in any factor, the clock cards shall be suitably endorsed in respect of each employee so affected. 

 4. The provisions of this clause shall not apply to watchmen. 

 5. Whenever an employee, as a result of the introduction of short time in any establishment, works for less or is paid for less than five full days during any period of four consecutive weeks, such employee’s contract of employment shall be deemed to have been terminated by the employer in terms of clause 21(2) upon the last day of such four week and the employer shall pay to the employee, in lieu of notice, the amounts provided for in clause 21(2).” 


Accordingly, if there is a dispute about short time in the Metro region, which has a bearing on anything referred to in 1 to 5 above, then the employee or his union may refer a dispute to the Bargaining Council. If the dispute relates to sub-clause 1 or 4 above, it appears as though this could merely be reported to the Bargaining Council as a compliance issue. Alternatively, the dispute could be couched as the interpretation or application of a collective agreement. 

If clause 5 above has been breached ie the employees have been placed on short time for a period in excess of four weeks, then the employee or the union may refer a dispute based on a claim for severance pay (ie in view of the fact that the employee is deemed to have been terminated for operational reasons, the employee then becomes entitled to severance pay). 

With regard to Non-Metro areas, the Main Agreement for Non-Metro areas, alarmingly, does not contain any reference whatsoever to short time, except for a passing reference relating to the manner in which deductions are to be made from an employee’s weekly wage. Accordingly, in the absence of a collective agreement, which permits the implementation of short time in periods of slack trade, or in the absence of an individual agreement with each employee, an employer who operates his business in a Non-Metro area, may not unilaterally place an employee on short time. An employee who is placed unilaterally on  
[2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI) at 940
short time then has a claim against the employer for wages for the period that he or she was placed on short time. This claim should be lodged as a remuneration issue with the Bargaining Council. Where no Bargaining Council exists, this claim should be lodged with the Department of Labour, as a breach of the obligation to pay wages contained in section 32 of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act 75 of 1997. 

This is accordingly the position that exists in the Non-Metro areas of this Council. In the current case that we are now dealing with, short time may not be unilaterally implemented in the manner in which the respondent implemented it on 28 February. Short time could have been introduced as an alternative to retrenchment (section 189), but only after agreement had been reached on this issue with the employees. The effected employees have a claim against the respondent for unpaid wages for the period that they were on short time. The respondent may be entitled to resist this claim, if for example, he could show that at the meeting of 25 February, the issue of short time as an alternative to retrenchment had been raised and agreed upon. 

What rights, other than the right to retrench in terms of section 189, does an employer have when he is going through tough economic times, and his employees refuse to agree to be placed on short time? Conceivably, the employer might also go the route of the employer in the case of Fry’s Metals (Pty) Ltd v NUMSA & others1 2002 11 LAC 1.11.37, where the employer dismissed employees for operational requirements and employed others who were prepared to agree to short time. The union challenged the dismissals as being automatically unfair dismissals in contravention of section 187(1)(c) of the LRA ie a dismissal for the purpose of compelling employees to accept a demand. The LAC said that the distinction lay in whether the dismissal was carried out in order to force employees to accept the employer’s demand, or whether the employer was clearing the slate, in order to replace employees with others who were prepared to work under the new terms and conditions of employment. Accordingly, if employees refuse to go on short time, it is open to the employer to dismiss the employees in order to replace them with other employees who were prepared to agree at the outset of their employment contracts, to the introduction of short time in periods of slack trading. The LAC in the later Algorax matter (supra) the made this clear in no uncertain terms: 

“If they are not prepared to work short time and they refuse to do so, a dispute may then arise between the parties on whether the employees should work short time. That dispute is a matter of mutual interest. Such an employer may then dismiss the employees for operational requirements (ie in terms of section 189) in order to get rid of them permanently and employ a new workforce that will be prepared to work in accordance with the needs of his business. In such a case, the employer will be dismissing the old workforce because the contracts of employment he has with them can no longer properly serve his operational requirement. That was the nature of the dismissal that the employer effected in TAWU & others v Natal Co-operative (Pty) Ltd (1992) 13 ILJ 1154 (D) as well as in Fry’s Metals (Pty) Ltd v NUMSA & others (2003) 24 ILJ 133 (LAC). 


To what other forum may a short time dispute be referred? In the current matter, the union referred the short time dispute as an unfair labour practice within the  
[2005] 9 BALR 936 (NBCCMI) at 941
meaning of the Labour Relations Act. As I have made clear, this is not an unfair labour practice dispute, as understood by section 186(2) of the Act. However, outside of the ambit of the LRA, our law guarantees the right to fair labour practices. Chapter 2 of the Constitution guarantees employees the right to fair labour practices, and the forum, which has the power to deal with a dispute of this nature, is the Labour Court. Section 157(2) of the LRA provides as follows:

“The Labour Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the High Court in respect of any alleged or threatened violation of any fundamental right entrenched in Chapter 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, and arising from–

 (a) employment and from labour relations; . . . .”


Accordingly, and returning to the applicants and the respondent in this matter, the applicants might allege that the short time which was implemented by the respondent on 28 February, was an unlawful infringement of the employees constitutional right to fair labour practices, and the employees, through their union, could refer a dispute to the Labour Court in terms of section 157(2) of the Labour Relations Act. 

In this case, the dispute would first have to be referred to the Bargaining Council or the CCMA for conciliation in terms of section 157(4) of the LRA. 

It appears as though the most sensible course of action for the parties to take in this matter, is for the applicant trade union and the respondent to sit down and to negotiate a binding agreement, relating to the manner and the circumstances in which short time may be introduced. Indeed, at the end of the proceedings, the respondent indicated that he would be prepared to hold such a meeting. However, that is not something that this Bargaining Council has the power to enforce or oversee. 

The omission in the Non-Metro Agreement relating to short time is something that I believe should be addressed urgently by the parties to the Main Agreement. 

Ruling on jurisdiction

This forum does not have the jurisdiction to entertain the applicants’ dispute. The applicants do however have a claim for unpaid wages for the period that they were on short time, which claim should be lodged as a normal remuneration issue with the Bargaining Council. Other remedies are open to the parties, which have been briefly set out above. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


Footnotes
1	  Also reported at [2003] 2 BLLR 140 (LAC) – Ed.


End of Document