



Heshula v Old Mutual Superfund Pension Fund and others [2022] 4 BPLR 75 (PFA)
Pensions Law Reports

Division: Tribunal of the Pension Funds Adjudicator 
Case No: PFA/EC/00082877/2022/SB
Date: 28/09/2022
Before: MA Lukhaimane, Pension Funds Adjudicator
Keywords


Employee Benefits and Retirement — Pensions — Withdrawal benefit — Withholding upon employer’s request — Duties of fund — Deductions from pension benefits — Lawfulness.

Editor’s Summary


The complainant was a member of the first respondent pension fund by virtue of her employment with the third respondent from 1 July 2013 to 31 October 2019. According to the complainant, she retired from employment with immediate effect in May 2019 and the employer accepted her retirement. She was not paid a retirement benefit, and after a series of requests addressed to the fund in that regard, she learnt that the fund was withholding payment of her benefit at the employer’s behest, it being alleged that the employer suffered loss caused by the complainant’s fraudulent conduct. The complainant queried the employer's delay in providing the fund with evidence of her wrongdoing. In September 2021, the employer served her with a summons. The fund’s administrator only then invited the complainant to make representations regarding the withholding of the benefit.

In her complaint to the Pension Funds Adjudicator, the complainant alleged that the employer and the fund had colluded in delaying the payment of her retirement benefit until such time that the employer issued summons against her, so as to facilitate the withholding of her benefit.

Held that the rules of a fund are its constitution, and the doctrine of ultra vires applies. If the rules of a fund do not afford a fund the legal power to do something, then such purported act by the fund is ultra vires and accordingly null and void. 

As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Pension Funds Act 24 of 1956. Section 37D(1)(b)(ii), which was relevant in this matter, does not authorise the withholding of a member's benefit where she is potentially liable for theft, fraud or misconduct against the employer. However, to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording has to be interpreted purposively to include the power to withhold payment of a member's pension benefits pending the determination or acknowledgement of such member's liability.

 A consideration of relevant case law established that the fund should put the employer’s case to the employee to afford her the opportunity to respond thereto before taking a decision to withhold a benefit. For the employer to succeed in having any amounts deducted from the pension funds of an employee, it must first establish that the member has committed theft, dishonesty, fraud or dishonesty-related misconduct. The duties placed on a board of fund in section 7C of the Act envisages scrutiny of claims made against benefits by employers, and a weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording the member an opportunity to place her case properly before the fund. 

In this case, the fund’s administrator set a timeframe within which the employer had to submit a formal request for withholding of complainant’s benefit. When the employer failed to adhere to the deadline, the administrator did not release the benefit to the complainant. It accepted the employer’s late submission of the request and gave it a further 45 days to submit documentation and proof of legal proceedings. The fund failed to properly consider the circumstances and consequently, the time period afforded to the employer was unreasonably long and reflected bias towards the employer.

The fund was ordered to pay the complainant her benefit plus penalty interest within one week of the ruling.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Lukhaimane:

Determination in terms of section 30M of the Pension Funds Act, 24 of 1956 (“the Act”)

[1]    Introduction

The complaint concerns the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit by the fund at the behest of the employer in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act. 
The complaint was received by this Tribunal on 05 January 2022. On 09 January 2022, a notification of the complaint was sent to the respondents affording them until 08 February 2022 to resolve the complaint. On the same date, a letter was sent to the complainant, notifying her that the complaint was forwarded to the respondents for possible resolution. A response was received from the employer on 08 February 2022. On 09 February 2022, formal responses were requested from the respondents by 09 March 2022, following the lapse of the period afforded to them to resolve the complaint. On the same date, a letter acknowledging receipt of the complaint was sent to the complainant. A response was received from the fund on 15 February 2022.
After considering the written submissions before the Adjudicator it is considered unnecessary to hold a hearing in this matter. The determination and reasons therefor appear below.

[2]    Factual background

The complainant was a member of the fund by virtue of her employment with the employer from 01 July 2013 to 31 October 2019 .
The employer requested that the fund withhold payment of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit due to the loss it suffered as a result of latter’s alleged fraudulent conduct. The fund acceded to the employer’s request.

[3]    Complaint

The complainant is dissatisfied with the fund’s refusal to pay her withdrawal benefit. She submitted that:
She retired from employment with immediate effect in May 2019 and the employer duly accepted her retirement.
On 30 October 2019, she enquired with the employer about the payment of her retirement benefit and received no response from the employer.
In November 2019, she formally submitted her completed and signed retirement claim forms to the employer’s human resources department.
In January 2020, she enquired with the fund about her retirement claim and was informed that the employer did properly sign her claim forms and incorrectly reflected her exit type as resignation instead of retirement.
On 11 March 2020, after making countless enquiries with the employer about the payment of her benefit, she emailed the employer’s director, Mr P Tladi (the “director”) who confirmed receipt of her claim forms and promised to enquire on the progress of the payment of her retirement benefit. She was concerned about the lack of responses from the employer and demanded that she speaks to the director.
On 31 March 2020, she forwarded a one-sided written communication between herself and the employer to the fund. The fund confirmed receipt of her email.
On 01 July 2020, she enquired about the unreasonable delay in processing her claim and the employer’s delay in providing the fund with evidence of her wrongdoing.
On 05 August 2020, she requested the fund to provide her with a case number in respect of the criminal proceedings instituted against her by the employer. She received feedback from the administrator confirming that the fund had sufficient information to continue withholding her benefit pending the outcome of the legal proceedings instituted against her. The administrator advised her to contact the employer if she had any further enquiries relating thereto.
She provided a copy an email from the fund reflecting its unlawful decision to withhold her benefit without first granting her an opportunity to make representations with regards to the withholding. She stated that matter was dragged out for an extended period of time, thereby granting the employer an unfair advantage in fabricating accusations for purposes of lodging both criminal and civil proceedings against her.
In September 2021, she was served with summons from the employer, after intentionally prolonging the payment of her claim in collusion with the administrator.
She stated that she was denied her constitutional right to make representations to the fund before it agreed to withhold payment of her benefit at the behest of the employer.
In October 2021, the administrator attempted to cover up its unlawful deeds by sending her an email and requesting her to make representations with regards to the withholding.
She informed the fund of her dissatisfaction with its unlawful withholding of her retirement benefit for an unreasonable length of time.
She provided the following documentary evidence:
An email addressed to the employer’s human resources department wherein she tendered her retirement from employment with immediate effect on the same date 21 May 2019. (The email does not bear a date nor address and there is no proof that same was sent to the employer).
An email dated 30 October 2019 and addressed to the director wherein she refers to her email of 21 May 2019, pertaining to her notice retirement. She requested that her retirement be processed as soon as possible. She indicted that she has not received any communication, neither by email nor telephone call regarding her retirement.
An email addressed to the administrator wherein she requested documentation pertaining to the employer’s request to withhold her benefit (the email does not bear a date).
A letter from the employer addressed to the complainant and dated 06 November 2019, wherein it confirmed that her retirement end date was 31 October 2019.
Email correspondence between the administrator and the complainant dated 19 May 2020, 22 May 2020 and 25 May 2020 wherein the complainant followed up on her several requests pertaining to the withholding of her benefit.
An email addressed to the administrator on 17 June 2020, stating the lack of communication from the administrator and the fund in response to her several enquiries. She indicated that same constitutes an unfair treatment towards her and bias towards the employer.
An email addressed to the administrator, dated 01 July 2020, wherein she submitted that it has been four months since she requested that she be presented with a case number in respect of the alleged legal proceedings against her. She indicated that the matter is being dragged out for too long without any evidence that the employer instituted criminal proceedings against her.
An email from the administrator dated 05 August 2020, wherein it stated that the fund received sufficient information to continue withholding her benefit in the fund pending the outcome of the criminal and civil proceedings. Further, that the complainant should contact the employer should she have any further queries in that regard.
Email from the administrator addressed to her and dated 18 October 2021, wherein the former stated that:
The employer has complied with the mandatory requirements of the fund in relation to her withholding request.
The employer indicated that she was involved in fraudulent schemes with two other co-accused causing the former to suffer damages in the amount of R1 495 702.60.
The fund requires her input on the allegations made and requested her version of events. The fund will not use her submissions against her in a court of law and that her representations are required to assist its legal advisor in making a decision with regards to an interim payment request.
The complainant requests this Tribunal to investigate the matter. She submitted that the employer and the fund colluded in delaying the payment of her retirement benefit until such time that the employer issued summons against her to enable the withholding.

[4]    Responses

Fund and administrator

A response was received on behalf of the fund and the administrator, together with supporting documentation, which reflects that:
The complainant became a member of the fund on 01 July 2013.
The last contributions received in respect of the complainant were on 31 October 2019.
The complainant’s withdrawal benefit, as at 15 February 2022, amounted to R3 014 861.95.
On 03 December 2019, the employer notified the administrator that the complainant resigned with effect from 31 October 2019. However, the employer did not provide the complainant’s claim form for processing.
On 22 January 2020, the fund’s consultant requested the employer to submit the complainant’s claim documentation.
On 19 March 2020, the administrator received a hard copy of the complainant’s claim documentation from a post-net address. However, same was incomplete.
On 23 March 2020, the complainant contacted the Customer Service Centre of the administrator and provided her payment instructions. The complainant advised that she would provide it with the transferee fund’s details in due course.
On 30 March 2020, the complainant submitted a complaint to the administrator stating that the employer refused to sign her claim documentation.
On 31 March 2020, the administrator contacted the complainant in respect of the complaint lodged. The complainant informed the administrator that the employer had not notified her of any claim against her in terms of section 37D of the Act prior to her retirement.
On 01 April 2020, the fund’s consultant requested the employer to submit the complainant’s electronic claim form in order to process same. The fund’s consultant further informed the employer that the complainant lodged a complaint in respect of the delay in finalising the payment of her withdrawal benefit and further confirmed that, her employment was terminated due to retirement and not due to resignation, as indicated by the employer.
On the same date, the complainant enquired as to whether or not the banks may seek settlement from the fund for outstanding payments due by her.
The administrator informed the complainant that the banks may not claim against her fund benefit as a third party.
On 02 April 2020, the fund’s consultant requested that the employer provides a date as to when they can expect the complainant’s claim form.
On 08 April 2020, the administrator followed up with the employer on the complainant’s outstanding claim forms.
On 17 April 2020, the fund’s consultant followed up with the employer on the complainant’s claim form and the reason for the delay in submitting the required documentation for processing payment of her benefit.
On 18 April 2020, the complainant enquired with the administrator about the reason for the delay in finalising the payment of her benefit.
On 22 April 2020, the complainant followed up with the administrator on the progress of her claim. On the same date the administrator attempted to contact the complainant to no avail and followed up with the complainant in writing for a suitable time to contact her telephonically. No response was received.
On 28 April 2020, the administrator informed the employer that it has not been provided with the requisite documentation in order to process the complainant’s benefit and requested that the employer provides reasons for the delay in submitting the claim form and confirmation of exit type as the complainant disputed the reason for exit. The administrator in its email, referred to a telephone conversation with the employer and advised that the process to withhold the complainant’s benefit may only commence once it receives a formal request from the employer. It granted the employer 7 days to make its withholding request. It further stated that the employer will then be afforded a further 45 days to institute criminal or civil proceedings against the complainant. The failure to provide same within the specified time will result in the temporary lien being removed and payment of the complainant’s benefit to her.
On 04 May 2020, the complainant’s son submitted a complaint on behalf of the complainant and requested that the administrator intervenes in the matter.

On the same date, the administrator requested the complainant’s consent to liaise with her son on the matter. The complainant confirmed receipt of the administrator’s request and advised that she was unwell and therefore her son enquired on her behalf.

On 11 May 2020, the employer notified the fund’s consultant that it is in the process of dealing with a “serious matter of misconduct” and that it has taken the decision to withhold the complainant’s benefit pending the outcome of its investigation .
On 13 May 2020, the complainant enquired with the administrator on the progress of her claim. On the same date the administrator informed the complainant that the employer requested for her benefit to be withheld in terms of section 370 sic of the Act.
The administrator acknowledged receipt of the employer’s request to withhold the complainant’s benefit and provided the employer 45 days to submit the relevant documentation in support of the potential claim in terms of section 370 sic of the Act. It stated that the 45-day time period, is the standard business practice of the fund, that is implemented in all withholding requests. The said period expired on 15 July 2020.
On 19 May 2020, the complainant enquired with the administrator on the progress of the matter and requested evidence on the allegations made against her.
On 20 May 2020, the employer acknowledged receipt of the administrator’s requirements set out in the correspondence dated 13 May 2020.
On 25 May 2020, the administrator provided the complainant with the correspondence dated 13 May 2020 wherein the complainant was informed of the withholding request. On the same date, the complainant confirmed receipt of the administrator’s mail in respect of the withholding request against her benefit.
On 01 June 2020, the administrator requested the employer to provide the particulars of the claim and the circumstances surrounding the request to withhold the complainant’s benefit.
On 17 June 2020, the complainant enquired with the administrator on the progress of the matter.
On 18 June 2020, the administrator followed up with the employer for the particulars of claim.
On the same date, the administrator responded to the complainant and informed her that the matter will be referred to the relevant department for investigation.
On 01 July 2020, the complainant informed the administrator that it had been more than four months since the employer was requested to provide details pertaining to the allegations against her.
On 02 July 2020, the administrator requested the employer to provide feedback on the case. On the same date, the employer informed the administrator that the matter is subject to a criminal investigation and that further details will be provided by 03 July 2020.
On 15 July 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant requested that the administrator provides an alternative address in order to courier the affidavit to, as the national lockdown prohibited the administrator from receiving documentation at its office. It stated that its attorneys were in the process of collating evidence for purposes of the employer’s civil claim.
On 16 July 2020, the administrator’s legal adviser confirmed that the affidavit may be sent to her residential address for review and provided her address directly to the employer’s forensic consultant.
On 20 July 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant provided the administrator’s legal adviser with the South African Police Services (SAPS) case number: 53/7/2020, the station’s contact details and confirmed that the director’s affidavit would be couriered by 21 July 2020.
On 21 July 2020, the administrator’s legal adviser confirmed receipt of the employer’s forensic consultant’s update on the matter.
On 30 July 2020, the administrator’s legal adviser followed up with the employer’s forensic consultant on the outstanding affidavit.
On the same date the employer’s forensic consultant informed the administrator’s legal advisor that the director had to self-isolate and therefore could not sign the affidavit, however its office will provide the affidavit by 31 July 2020.
On 03 August 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant provided the administrator’s legal advisor with an unsigned affidavit as the Director of the employer was still off-sick.
On 03 August 2020, a copy of an unsigned affidavit, a notice of suspension, a summary of allegations, the notice of a disciplinary hearing and the prior claim form reflecting damages amounting to R2,830,846.99 (which amounted to the complainant’s full benefit at the time). On the same date the administrator’s legal adviser confirmed receipt of the affidavit and informed the employer’s forensic consultant that the documentation will be reviewed.
The administrator’s legal advisor accepted the unsigned affidavit in the interim. A withholding decision was made based on the information provided to the administrator on condition that the employer provided regular updates on the matter.
On 04 August 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant confirmed receipt of the administrator’s withholding decision.
On 05 August 2020, the administrator requested the employer to provide the SAPS investigating officer’s contact details.
On the same date, the administrator informed the complainant that the fund received sufficient information to continue withholding her benefit.
On 13 August 2020 the employer’s forensic consultant informed the administrator that its office met with the warrant officer from the Hawks on the case and provided the officer’s contact details along with the Asset Forfeiture Unit’s reference number: 01/08/2020.
On 14 August 2020, the administrator’s legal advisor acknowledged receipt of the update provided by the employer’s forensic consultant.
On 25 August 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant provided the administrator with an update on the investigation.
On 26 August 2020, the administrator’s legal adviser acknowledged receipt of the employer’s forensic consultant’s update.
On 13 October 2020, the employer’s forensic consultant informed the administrator that it awaits an update on the ongoing investigation from the warrant officer, BO Bushula (Hawks) and that the investigation was also forwarded to Mr. Mario Joubert (chief forensic investigator) from the Special Investigations Unit. On the same date, the administrator’s legal adviser confirmed receipt of the employer’s update.
On 11 December 2020, the administrator requested the employer’s forensic consultant to provide an update on the matter and received a read receipt on the same date. No response was received.
On 26 January 2021, the administrator requested the employer’s forensic consultant to provide an update on the matter.
On 27 January 2021, the employer’s forensic consultant informed the administrator that the latest update was referred to the administrator on 22 October 2020, and advised that the warrant officer is currently conducting further investigations into the complainant’s financial position and assets.
On 13 April 2021, the administrator requested the employer’s forensic consultant to provide an update on the matter.
On 16 April 2021, the employer’s forensic consultant provided the administrator with an update on the matter.
On 19 April 2021, the administrator confirmed receipt of the employer’s update and confirmed that the update is sufficient to continue to withhold the complainant’s benefit.
On the same date the employer’s forensic consultant acknowledged the due date for the next update to be provided on the matter.
On 17 June 2021, the complainant informed the administrator that she was unhappy with the manner in which her case was being managed.
The employee of the administrator denies that he was “rude” to the complainant. The employee advised that the complainant managed to get hold of his private cellphone number and he requested the complainant to refrain from contacting him on his private cellphone number, as calls via employees’ private contact numbers are not recorded by the administrator.
On 18 June 2021, the employers forensic consultant provided the administrator with an update on the matter.
On 09 July 2021, the administrator confirmed receipt of the employer’s update and confirmed that the update is sufficient to continue to withhold the complainant’s benefit.
On 23 August 2021, the employer’s forensic consultant requested the administrator to provide the complainant’s current benefit value.
On 24 August 2021, the administrator provided the employer’s forensic consultant with the complainant’s benefit statement.
On the same date the employer’s forensic consultant confirmed receipt of the benefit statement.
On 30 August 2021, the complainant contacted the administrator’s Customer Service Centre to enquire on the progress of the claim. The Customer Service Agent informed the complainant that the administrator awaits feedback from the employer on the matter.
On 01 September 2021, the complainant contacted the administrator’s Customer Service Centre to enquire on the progress of the claim. The Customer Service Agent informed the complainant that the administrator awaits an acknowledgement of debt form from the employer.
On 23 September 2021, the employer’s forensic consultant provided the administrator with an update on the criminal case and provided a copy of the summons in respect of the civil action instituted by the employer against the complainant to recover the loss incurred, with case number 2875/2021, same of which was served on the complainant on 22 September 2021.
On the same date the administrator acknowledged receipt of the summons and updates. The administrator informed the employer’s forensic consultant that the documentation will be referred to its legal adviser for review.
On 18 October 2021, the administrator requested the employer’s forensic consultant to confirm the amount in respect of damages to be withheld by the fund and whether the complainant was served with the summons, the administrator further requested a copy of the return of service received from the Sheriff of the court.
On the same date, the administrator informed the complainant of the allegations made against her by the employer and that the employer is claiming an amount for damages incurred due to her alleged misconduct. The administrator requested the complainant to provide her input on the allegations for purposes of determining whether it could release a portion of her benefit to her.
On 19 October 2021, the employer’s attorney informed the administrator that the damages being claimed by the employer do not only consist of the capital amount of R1,495,702.60, and that it includes interest plus costs and that summons was served upon the complainant.
On 20 October 2021, the administrator informed the employer’s attorney that section 370(1)(b)(ii) sic of the Act does not make provision for interest to be deducted from the member’s benefit, only legal costs”.
On 21 October 2021, the employer’s attorney provided its response to the administrator’s legal adviser’s feedback.
On 22 October 2021, the complainant responded to the administrator’s request for input on the allegations made against her. However, the complainant omitted to provide her input on the allegations and expressed her grievances with the administrator’s decision to withhold payment.
On the same date, the administrator acknowledged the complainant’s dissatisfaction and informed the complainant that her response will be referred to its legal division for review.
On 26 October 2021, the administrator acknowledged the complainant’s concerns in her response and advised that the benefit will continue to be withheld. The administrator informed the complainant that should she still be aggrieved with the decision made by the fund, she may refer the matter to this Tribunal.
The fund submitted that the decision to withhold the complainant’s benefit was based on the documentary submissions made by the employer at the time. The decision was based on an affidavit which set out a prima facie case of fraud. The complainant was allegedly involved in a fraudulent scheme which caused the employer to suffer financial loss. The fund submitted that the withholding decision was made on condition that the employer provides regular updates, at three-month intervals, on the progress on the matter.
It concluded its response by stating that it duly provided the employer with a reasonable timeframe to provide evidence in support of the alleged damages caused by the complainant for its review. The administrator accordingly notified the complainant of the withholding request and provided her an opportunity to submit her averments on the subject matter. However, the complainant had not submitted any probative evidence, nor has she provided her version of events to the fund that would suggest that the employer does not have a prima facie case against the complainant. The fund requested that the complaint be dismissed.

Employer

A response was received from the employer on 08 February 2022. The submissions made therein are extensive and for the purposes of determining the matter, are summarised as follows:
The complainant, in her role as residence manager, was responsible for appointing service providers and authorising payment to those service providers. In accordance with the employer’s supply chain management policy, the complainant was required to obtain three quotations from three independent service providers from the employer’s database of registered service providers. The complainant was required to select the lowest quotation and authorise payment thereof.
In November 2018, the employer was alerted by a whistle-blower that the complainant was involved in a fraudulent quoting scheme. The employer subsequently launched investigations which revealed that the complainant initiated and/or was involved in the running of a fraudulent scheme which was aimed at providing the complainant’s relatives and acquaintances with an unfair advantage over the employer’s registered service providers.
As result of the complainant’s damages, fraudulent scheme the employer suffered
The complainant was given notice of precautionary suspension on 05 December 2018.
A notice to attend a disciplinary hearing was issued to the complainant and was signed by her on 11 March 2019.
The complainant subsequently elected to retire from employment with immediate effect on 21 May 2019, whilst disciplinary proceedings against her were underway.
Following forensic investigations, the employer lodged a criminal case at the Alice Police Station in July 2020 under case number: CAS 53/07/2020, on allegations of fraud, forgery and uttering, theft, and racketeering. It provided email confirmation from warrant officer Beshula, dated 18 January 2022 confirming that the matter was still under investigation.
On 14 September 2021, the employer instituted civil proceeding under case number: 2875/2021 in the Grahamstown High Court.
Summons were served on the complainant on 22 September 2021.
Per its civil proceedings, it claimed an amount of R1 495 702.60 from the complainant and two other defendants.
On April 2020, the employer requested the fund to withhold the complainant’s pension benefit on the basis of the complainant’s misconduct.
The fund requested the employer to provide the requisite information by 15 July 2020 in order to assess the latter’s request for withholding. The employer responded to the fund’s request on 15 July 2020.
On 05 August 2020, the fund confirmed that after reviewing the employer’s request, it agreed to withhold the complainant’s pension benefit on condition that the latter provides the former with regular progress reports on the civil and criminal cases every three months.
Since making its request, the employer’s attorney provided the fund with regular updates on the status of the criminal and civil proceedings and has followed up regularly with SAPS.
It denies that it acted unlawfully when it requested the fund to withhold the complainant’s pension benefit stating that it has a legitimate claim over her pension benefit.
It believes that it has a prima facie case against the complainant in respect of the legal proceedings instituted.
It has no knowledge nor record that the complainant duly completed, signed and submitted withdrawal claim forms to its human resources department in November 2019.
The complainant provided a copy of an email addressed to the director on 30 October 2019, wherein she requested feedback on the progress of her pension withdrawal claim. However, the email correspondence appears to have portions cut-off. Thus, to the extent that the complainant intends to rely on portions of the email that are not visible, the complainant is required to produce evidence thereof. The employer no longer has record of correspondence to the extent that same existed.
The employer has no knowledge of the complainant contacting its director by email on 11 March 2020, where she enquired about the progress of her pension claim and the complainant has failed to produce a copy of the email she refers to.
The employer has no knowledge of whether or not the fund afforded the complainant an opportunity to make representations before the latter decided to withhold her benefit.
The fund’s decision to withhold the complainant’s benefit was not irrational, unfair nor unfounded. The fund correctly arrived at the conclusion that the employer has a prima facie case against the complainant and there been no undue delay in instituting legal proceedings against her.

[5]    Determination and reasons therefor

Introduction

The issue for determination is whether or not the fund acted lawfully when it agreed to withhold the complainant’s benefit at the behest of the employer.

Fund rules and the complainant’s benefit entitlement

In the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) matter of Municipal Employees Pension Fund v Mongwaketse (969/2019) [2020] ZASCA 181 (23 December 2020) [also reported at [2021] 1 BPLR 79 (SCA); [2020] JOL 49235 (SCA) – Ed] at paragraphs [42] to [44], Wallis JA held that the rules of a fund are its constitution, and that the doctrine of ultra vires applies. If the rules of a fund do not afford a fund the legal power or capacity to do something, then such purported act by the fund is ultra vires and accordingly null and void. The Constitutional Court affirmed the SCA’s findings in Municipal Employees Pension Fund and Another v Mongwaketse (CCT34/21) [2022] ZACC 9 [also reported at [2022] JOL 52511 (CC) – Ed] at paragraph [39] where it stated that the application of the ultra vires doctrine to pension funds is consistent with the constitutional principle of legality.
Rule 9.2 of the fund provides for the withholding of a benefit and reads as follows:

9.2  DEDUCTIONS FROM BENEFITS

(1) The FUND may make any deduction from a benefit or the value of a MEMBER ACCOUNT, PRESERVER MEMBER ACCOUNT, or DEFERRED RETIREE ACCOUNT, as the case may be, as are allowed in terms of the Act and other acts that it refers to in this regard
(2) The FUND may also reasonably withhold payment of a portion or the whole of any benefit payable in respect of a MEMBER or a BENEFICIARY provided that:
The amount of the benefit so withheld does not exceed the amount that may be deducted in terms of the ACT;
The FUND is satisfied that the PARTICIPATING EMPLOYER has established a prima facie case against the MEMBER concerned;
The FUND is satisfied that the PARTICIPATING EMPLOYER is not at any stage responsible for any undue delay in the prosecution of the proceedings;
nce the proceedings have been finally determined by a competent court of law, or settled or withdrawn, any benefit amount to which the MEMBER or BENEFICIARY is entitled, and which was withheld, is paid immediately.
As a general principle of law, pension benefits are not reducible, transferable or executable save for certain exceptions as outlined in sections 37A and 37D of the Act. The relevant section of the Act in this complaint is section 37D(1)(b) [of the Act – Ed], specifically sub-section (ii) thereof which provides that:

“37D(1) A registered fund may-

(a) 
(b) deduct any amount due by a member to his employer on the date of his retirement or on which he ceases to be a member of the fund, in respect of-

 (i)

compensation (including any legal costs recoverable from the member in a matter contemplated in subparagraph (bb)) in respect of any damage caused to the employer by reason of any theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct by the member, and in respect of which -
the member has in writing admitted liability to the employer; or
judgment has been obtained against the member in any court, including a magistrate’s court,

  from any benefit payable in respect of the member or a beneficiary in terms of the rules of the fund, and pay such amount to the employer concerned;”

On a plain reading of the provision, section 370(1)(b)(ii) [of the Act – Ed] does not authorise the withholding of a member’s benefit where he/she is potentially liable for theft, fraud or misconduct against the employer. However, in the case of Highveld Steel and Vanadium Corporation Ltd v Oosthuizen [2009] 1 BPLR 1 (SCA), where the Supreme Court of Appeal (“SCA”) held at paragraph [19] that:

“Such an interpretation would render the protection afforded to the employer by section 37D(1)(b) meaningless, a result which plainly cannot have been intended by the Legislature. It seems to me that to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording must be interpreted purposively to include

the power to withhold payment of a member’s pension benefits pending the

determination or acknowledgement of such member’s liability. The Funds therefore had the discretion to withhold payment of the Respondent’s pension benefit in the circumstances.”

In Appana v Kelvinator Group Services of SA Provident Fund [2000] 2 BPLR 126 (PFA) at page 129 D-G, this Tribunal held:

“The purposive approach requires the interpreter to attach a meaning to the words which will promote the aim of the provision. Or to put it differently the purpose of the legislation must be determined and then given effect to.

The purpose of rule 8.2.1.4 and section 37D(b) sic , as stated, is to protect the employer’s patrimony from diminution by member misconduct and to allow an appropriate set-off against the pension benefits. Thus, in order to give effect to the purpose of rule 8.2.1.4, we must extend the textual meaning of the words to include not only a power to deduct but also the power to withhold a benefit pending the determination of liability.

An interpretation of rule 8.2.1.4 along these lines is essentially an application of the ex accessorio eius, de quo verba loquuntur maxim applied by our courts usually in respect of enabling legislation. The maxim provides that if a statutory provision confers a power, it also by implication confers those powers reasonably necessary to achieve the principal aim.”

 It is accordingly permissible for a board of a fund to withhold a benefit in pursuance of a claim in terms of section 37D(1)(b)(ii) of the Act.

In the Highveld case at paragraph 19, the court held that in interpreting section 37D(1)(b) of the Act,

“It seems to me that to give effect to the manifest purpose of the section, its wording must be interpreted purposively to include the power to withhold payment of a member’s pension benefit pending the determination or acknowledgement of such member’s liability. The funds therefore had the discretion to withhold payment of the respondent’s pension benefit in the circumstances. I daresay such discretion was properly exercised in the view of the glaring absence of any serious challenge to the appellant’s detailed allegations of dishonesty against the respondent.”

In reference to the above paragraph in the Highveld case, the process of balancing the competing interests can be achieved by assessing the potential harm that will be suffered by the employee if the remedy (provided in section 370(1)(b)(ii)) is granted as compared with, or balanced against, the potential harm to the employer if the remedy is not granted (see Shoba v Officer Commanding , Temporary Police Camp, Wagendrift Dam, and Another; Maphanga v Officer Commanding, South African Police Murder and Robbery Unit, Pietermaritzburg, and Others [1995] 2 All SA 300 (A) which dealt with the issue of granting an Anton Piller order and cited with approval in Non-Detonating Solutions (Pty) Ltd v Durie and another [2015] 4 All SA 630 (SCA) at paragraph [20]).
In the judgement of SA Metal Group (Pty) Ltd v Deon Jeftha and 2 Others Case [2020] 1 BPLR 20 (WCC), Steyn J stated at paragraph [62] that:

“I agree with the argument of Mr Freund SC, that one can safely assume that the employer’s case, as related to the fund, must be put to the employee to afford him an opportunity to respond thereto before the fund should assume the liberty to take a decision impacting on the rights of the employee ... The question remains whether the fund applied their mind appropriately, impartially and in a balanced manner.”

The High Court in SA Metal Group further held that:

 5.9.1 The mere satisfaction by the trustees of a fund that the employer has placed allegations before them which, if true, would show damages arising from dishonest conduct by the employee, would not on its own be sufficient to meet the test set out by the SCA in Highveld Steel.

 5.9.2 The withholding of an employee’s benefit is analogous to that of an anti­ dissipation order, which requires a well-grounded apprehension of irreparable harm or loss and because of its Draconian nature, invasiveness, and conceivably inequitable consequences, the courts have been reluctant to grant it except in the clearest of cases (citing OS v OS and Others (43425/11)[2012]ZAGPJHC 227, at para 17 - 18).

 5.9.3 In order for the employer to succeed in having any amounts deducted from the pension funds of an employee, it must first and foremost establish that the member has committed theft, dishonesty, fraud or misconduct. The latter must have an element of dishonesty (see also Meyer v Provincial Department of Health and Welfare and Others (9092/05) [2006] ZAGPHC [5 –Ed] (27 January 2006) [also reported at [2007] 1 BPLR 108 (T) – Ed] at paragraph [42]).

 5.9.4 The employer’s recourse against a pension fund is only available in limited rare cases where the causa for the claim is an element of discreditable, untrustworthy conduct by the employee to his employer. Section 370(1)(b)(ii) sic is exclusively reserved for employers who show that they are victims of specific dishonourable workplace transgressions. If not shown, the employer would not be entitled to the special protection envisaged (see also Boshoff v Iliad Africa Trading (Pty) Ltd tla Builders Market Welkom [2012] JOL 29400 (FB) at paragraphs [24] to [25]).

 5.9.5 The duties placed on a board of fund in section 7C of the Act envisages scrutiny of claims made against benefits by employers, and a weighing of the competing interests of the parties after affording the member an opportunity to place his case properly before the fund. The failure by the board to comply with its duties constitutes an inability by the board of the fund to comply with their legally prescribed fiduciary duties.

Analysis

In analysing the submissions in this complaint, it is necessary to consider the following timeline of events:

Timeframe for employer to provide requisite information.

The fund stated that it provided the employer with a reasonable timeframe to provide evidence in support of the alleged damages caused by the complainant. This Tribunal notes that in November 2018, the employer was alerted that the complainant was involved in a fraudulent quoting scheme. The complainant was given notice of precautionary suspension on 05 December 2018. A notice to attend a disciplinary hearing was issued to the complainant and was signed by her on 11 March 2019. On 03 December 2019, the fund was informed that the complainant’s employment terminated on 31 October 2019 . The administrator attempted to obtain the complainant’s claim documentation from the employer on several occasions between 22 January 2020 and 28 April 2020. On 28 April 2020, the administrator emailed the employer and advised it that, with reference to its telephone call, the process to withhold the complainant’s benefit may only commence once it receives a formal request from the employer. It granted the employer 7 days to make its withholding request. It further stated that upon receipt of the employer’s formal request, the employer will then be afforded 45 days to institute criminal or civil proceedings against the complainant. It indicated that the failure to provide same within the specified time period will result in the temporary lien being removed and payment of the complainant’s benefit to her.
Taking into account the date of the administrator’s email (28 April 2020), the employer had until 07 May 2020 (expiry of 7 working days) to formally submit its withholding request. The administrator specifically informed the employer that the failure to adhere to the timeline will result in the temporary lien being removed and payment of the complainant’s benefit to her. However, the employer failed to meet the deadline and only submitted its withholding request on 11 May 2020. The administrator did not release the benefit to the complainant upon the employer’s failure to submit its withholding request by 07 May 2020, despite its undertaking in this regard. Instead, the administrator condoned the employer’s late submission on 11 May 2020, and granted it a further 45 days from 13 May 2020 to submit documentation and proof of legal proceedings in support of its claim. It is clear that the administrator was aware of the potential prejudice that the complainant would suffer if the employer failed to adhere to the specified timeline. However, it disregarded its own timelines, and perpetuated the employer’s tardiness resulting in further prejudice to the complainant.
As stated above, the employer submitted its withholding request to the fund on 11 May 2020. On 13 May 2020, the fund granted the employer 45 days, in accordance with its business practise, to provide the fund with a proof of legal proceedings in support of the potential claim in terms of section 37D of the Act. It stated that the 45-day period lapsed on 15 July 2020.
Whilst the fund’s business practise is to allow the employer 45 days to submit documentation in support of its withholding request, this Tribunal must determine whether such time period is reasonable given the circumstances of the case. In light of the lapsing of time period between the complainant’s exit from employment (31 October 2019) and the date of the employer’s withholding request (11 May 2020), the fund ought to have obtained information from the employer pertaining to the time period that had already lapsed since the employer first became aware of the complainant’s alleged fraudulent conduct and interrogated the steps taken by the employer to prosecute same, before granting it 7-days from 28 April 2020 to make its request and 45 days from 13 May 2020 to provide proof of legal proceedings in support of its claim. This is especially in light of the fact that the employer deliberately withheld the complainant’s claim form since October 2019 (when she left employment) and the employer failed to respond to several requests from the administrator for the claim forms between January 2020 and May 2020. Had the fund properly interrogated the circumstances, it would have established that the employer first became aware of the complainant’s alleged fraudulent conduct in November 2018 and, as at the date of making its request in May 2020, it had not yet instituted criminal proceedings against the complainant. The employer only provided the fund with a criminal case number on 20 July 2020, more than one year and 7 months after the employer was first alerted to the complainant’s alleged fraudulent conduct. Thus, despite its business practise, the fund ought to have exercised its discretion in light of the potential prejudice to the complainant.
The complainant proactively engaged the fund on several occasions and for an extended period of time regarding the delay in processing her claim. The 45-day period lapsed on 15 July 2020, however the evidence indicates that the employer only furnished the administrator with proof of legal proceedings (the criminal case number) on 20 July 2020. That is, the employer once again failed to adhere to the timelines set out by the administrator. The administrator however, overlooked the employer’s tardiness to the prejudice of the complainant and accepted the employer’s late submissions. In light of the above, it is abundantly clear that fund failed to properly apply itself to circumstances and consequently, the time period afforded to the employer was unreasonably long and unjustified and reflects a high degree of unfair bias towards the employer.
It is further evident that the fund’s legal advisor, on 16 July 2020 provided her residential address and offered to review the employer’s unsigned affidavit. To this extent, the fund through its legal advisor, acted beyond its scope. It appears that the fund would have entertained all sorts of requests and unfounded excuses from the employer despite its tardiness and despite the prejudice caused to the complainant. The fund’s lack of impartiality is noted with dismay.

Balancing of interests

The fund stated that it notified the complainant of the employer’s withholding request and afforded the complainant an opportunity to make representations in that regard. The evidence indicates that the fund agreed to withhold the complainant’s benefit between 03 August 2020 and 04 August 2020. The complainant was informed of the fund’s decision to withhold her benefit on 05 August 2020, stating that it had sufficient evidence to withhold same pending the finalisation of the employer’s legal proceedings against her. It is clear that the complainant was only afforded an opportunity to place her version of events before the fund on 18 October 2021. That is, the fund acceded to the employer’s request to withhold the complainant’s benefit without having afforded the complainant an opportunity to make representations in respect thereof. It only requested the complainant’s submissions more than a year after it agreed to withhold the complainant’s benefit. The conduct of the fund is therefore inconsistent with the principle set out in Jeftha. The fund ought to note that that principle enunciated in the case of Jeftha, is not a tick box exercise that can be performed at any stage before payment is made . Rather, obtaining the complainant’s version of events is a catalyst for the withholding proceedings to commence. The fund cannot decide to withhold a benefit before affording the affected member an opportunity to state his or her case. This is not an automatic entitlement of the employer on condition that it produces proof of criminal and civil proceedings and an explanation of the conduct causing its loss. Rather, it requires the board to carefully apply itself to the circumstances of the matter and balance the interests of both the employer and the complainant. It cannot apply itself and balance the interests of both parties where it has not heard the side of one of the parties.
The fund failed to afford the complainant an opportunity to make submissions before it decided to withhold her benefit at the behest of the employer. It is disingenuous of the fund to contend that the complainant was afforded an opportunity to state her case to the fund, when same was only made one year and two months after the fund agreed to withhold her benefit at the behest of the employer. The complainant actively engaged the administrator long before the employer even made its withholding request (and for a cumulative period of two years before lodging her complaint with the Tribunal). Thus, the administrator had several opportunities to obtain the complainant’s averments before it made a decision to withhold her benefit. The fact that the complainant did not provide probative information indicating that the employer does not have a prima facie case, one year and two months after the fund agreed to withhold her benefit, does not justify the fund’s failure nor does it confirm that the fund’s decision to withhold the complainant’s benefit was lawful.
Furthermore, based on the evidence produced by the fund, the complainant was afforded an opportunity to make representations to the fund, in order for the fund to determine whether or not it could release a portion of the complainant’s benefit to her. That is, the fund did not request same for purposes of deciding whether or not to withhold the complainant’s benefit. Thus, it does not appear that the fund understands the principles set out in Jeftha and consequently, it is incapable of balancing the interests of both the employer and the complainant.
In light of the submissions before it, this Tribunal finds that the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit, at the behest of the employer, is unlawful. The fund failed to properly and timeously afford the complainant an opportunity to make submissions before it decided to withhold the complainant’s withdrawal benefit. Further, the fund did not interrogate the circumstances of the matter before granting the employer, what is evidently, an unreasonable time period to support its withholding request. It is clear that the administrator, acting on behalf of the board of the fund, was actively involved in assisting the employer to the prejudice of the complainant. Such conduct of the board and the administrator must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
In light of the above the relief sought by the complainant is granted. The board failed to properly apply itself to the matter causing prejudice to the complainant.

[6]    Order

In the result, the order of this Tribunal is as follows:
The decision of the board of the fund in relation to the withholding of the complainant’s withdrawal benefit is hereby set aside;
The fund is ordered to pay the complainant’s withdrawal benefit, less deductions permitted in terms of the Act, together with penalty interest calculated at the rate of 7% per annum from 03 December 2019 to date of payment within one week of this determination; and
The fund is ordered to provide the complainant with a detailed breakdown of the benefit paid in terms of paragraph 6.1.2 above, within two weeks of making such payment.


End of Document