



Tshabangu / Mgwezi Brand Manufacturer [2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Metal and Engineering Industries Bargaining Council
Case No: GAEK5897-21
Date: 02/11/2021
Before: CH Stripp, Panellist
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Derivative misconduct — Employee charged with failing to disclose continuing theft by colleagues — Dismissal fair.
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Theft — Employee implicated in theft by colleagues who had confessed to being part of scam and resigned — Dismissal fair.
Dispute resolution — Employee requesting bargaining council to arbitrate dispute after CCMA declined to assume jurisdiction — Council having jurisdiction to arbitrate because parties agreed that matter could be arbitrated without further conciliation meeting.

Editor’s Summary


After receiving an anonymous tip-off that its installers were selling scrap for their own gain, the respondent conducted an inquiry and established that about R75 000 worth of goods had been sold over a period of 12 months. When all the installers were interviewed, 11 admitted guilt and signed separation agreements after implicating the applicant. The applicant was called to a disciplinary hearing and dismissed. He admitted that he had been dismissed on an earlier occasion for selling scrap and been re-employed, but claimed that since then he had not sold anything belonging to the respondent. The applicant claimed that his dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair. The respondent contended that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate because the dispute had been referred late and that the applicant was at least guilty of “derivative misconduct” and had breached the trust relationship by not informing management of the thefts.

Turning first to the respondent’s jurisdictional point, the Commissioner noted that the applicant had referred the dispute to the CCMA for conciliation, but the conciliating commissioner had ruled that the Commission lacked jurisdiction because the parties fell within the jurisdiction of the MEIBC and declined to issue a certificate of outcome. The matter was set down by the council for arbitration without the applicant having referred a dispute, but he indicated then that he wished to pursue the matter and completed a request for arbitration which was served on the respondent. The Commissioner noted that the LAC had ruled that the issuing of a certificate of outcome is unnecessary to found jurisdiction to arbitrate 30 days after the date on which the dispute is referred for arbitration. In any event, the parties had agreed that the MEIBC would arbitrate  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 255
the dispute after the applicant requested it to arbitrate. Since that had occurred, the arbitration could continue.

On the merits, the Commissioner noted that in NUMSA obo Nganezi and others v Dunlop Mixing and Technical Services (Pty) Ltd and others [2019] 9 BLLR 865 (CC) the highest court had rejected the proposition that a duty of good faith requires employees to disclose wrongdoing by colleagues in the context of a violent strike and that the notion of “derivative misconduct” is inapplicable in those circumstances. However, in the earlier judgment of Western Platinum Refinery Ltd v Hlebela and others [2015] 9 BLLR 940 (LAC), “derivative misconduct” had been accepted as a sufficient basis for dismissing employees who breached the reciprocal duty of good faith by not disclosing theft by colleagues. Although evidence given by the witness who had been called by the respondent to testify about what had occurred during the applicant’s disciplinary hearing was hearsay, it indicated that the applicant had been given the opportunity to telephonically cross-examine those of his colleagues who had implicated him. The applicant’s claim that they had done so under duress was not acceptable because all the respondent had done was to inform the employees that the case would be referred to the police if they did not confess. That evidence was sufficient to show that the applicant had been implicated in theft. The dismissal was, accordingly, procedurally and substantively fair.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing and representation
The arbitration hearing took place on 28 October 2021 at the Centre for Dispute Resolution, Johannesburg. The proceedings relating to the arbitration were digitally recorded. The hearing was conducted in English. The applicant appeared in person and the respondent was represented by Mr Lemmer, a SATEA Official. 
The arbitration was held under the auspices of the MEIBC, in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 as amended, hereinafter referred to as “the Act”, and the award is issued in terms of section 138(7) of the Act. 

Issue to be decided
The purpose of the hearing was to determine whether the applicant’s dismissal was procedurally and substantively unfair and if found to be unfair the relief to be awarded. 
The applicant claimed that the dismissal was procedurally unfair as he was not notified of the allegations nor was he entitled to the assistance of a shop steward/ fellow employee at the disciplinary hearing. 
The applicant challenged the substantive fairness only on the basis that he was not guilty of the allegation. 
The applicant seeks retrospective reinstatement.  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 256

Background to the issue in dispute
The applicant referred an unfair dismissal dispute to the CCMA 27 July 2021, claiming that he was unfairly dismissed on 22 July 2021.
The applicant was employed by the respondent from 2002 until 2010 when he was dismissed. The applicant was re-employed by the respondent on 3 July 2012. At the date of dismissal the applicant was employed as an Installer earning R2 812 per week.
The applicant was dismissed on 24 July 2021 as he was found guilty of dishonesty.

Preliminary issues
The matter was set down for conciliation for 13 August 2021 under the auspices of the CCMA. The respondent objected to con/arb. The commissioner ruled that the MEIBC has jurisdiction to deal with the dispute. The commissioner did not issue a certificate of outcome. The applicant did not request arbitration. 
The matter was set down for arbitration in the absence of the applicant filing a request for arbitration. On 28 October 2021 the applicant indicated that he wished to pursue his dispute, he completed a request for arbitration and served same on the respondent.
In determining whether or not the applicant filed the request for arbitration in time I relied on the judgment in South African Municipal Workers Union obo Manentza v Ngwathe Local Municipality and others (JA56/13) [2015] ZALAC 26; [2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC); (2015) 36 ILJ 2581 (LAC) which reads section 191(5) of the LRA provides for the occurrence of either of the events: the issue of a certificate or expiry of 30 days from receipt of the referral as an objective fact which founds the employee’s right to proceed to arbitration or adjudication. The employee’s entitlement to refer the matter to arbitration or adjudication as contemplated in section 191(5)(a) and (b) of the LRA respectively, does not arise from any election on the employee’s part as contended for by the appellant, but rather from whichever of the two jurisdictional events occurs first in sequence of time. Thus, where conciliation takes place under the auspices of the CCMA or a bargaining council within the 30 day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA, and a certificate of non-resolution is issued within that period, the employee’s right to refer the dispute to arbitration or adjudication will be triggered by the issue of the certificate as the jurisdictional event conferring this right. In this case, the subsequent expiry of the 30 day period will play no role in founding the employee’s right to refer the dispute to arbitration or adjudication. Similarly, where the 30 day period contemplated in the subsection lapses without the holding of a conciliation proceeding and the CCMA or a bargaining council certifying that the dispute remains unresolved, the lapse of the 30 day period will form the jurisdictional trigger entitling the employee to refer the dispute to arbitration. This right, having accrued to the employee upon the lapse of the 30 day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA will not  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 257
  be affected by the convening of any subsequent conciliation proceedings or the issue of a certificate of outcome consequent thereupon.
In the matter before me the applicant referred the dispute to the CCMA on 27 July 2021. The conciliation did not take place as the commissioner ruled that the CCMA lacked jurisdiction. The 30 days for conciliation lapsed on 26 August 2021. Therefore, in requesting arbitration on 28 October 2021, the applicant requested arbitration within 90 days of the 30 days for conciliation. 
I am mindful that the notice of set down was served on the parties by the MEIBC in the absence of a request for arbitration and accordingly the MEIBC did not have jurisdiction to set the matter down for arbitration. The parties agreed to proceed with the arbitration in the absence of the MEIBC setting the matter down for arbitration after the request for arbitration was filed. I proceeded with the arbitration on 28 October 2021, the day that the applicant served the request for arbitration, on the basis that the parties agreed to a shorter period for the notice of set down as contemplated in rule 21 of the Rules for the Conduct of Proceedings before the CCMA (“the Rules”). It is trite that the MEIBC has adopted the Rules. 

Survey of evidence and argument 
The respondent and the applicant submitted a bundle of documents hereinafter referred to as “Bundle R”. 
The respondent explained that the colleagues who implicated the applicant left the employ of the respondent. They were disgruntled and did not wish to be involved any further. The respondent therefore relied on the evidence of the investigator who recorded the interviews with said colleagues. The respondent argued that this amounted to direct evidence of the interviews. 
The applicant confirmed that the summary of the video recordings and telephonic conversations reflected in the summary of disciplinary hearing was accurate. 

Respondent’s evidence

Mr Breytenbach, Production Manager 
The respondent received an anonymous tip-off that the installation team was selling goods of the respondent, including pop rivets, double sided tape and scrap, namely old signs. The respondent appointed an investigator. The estimated loss was around R75 000 over 12 months. 
The investigator interviewed all the Installers. Eleven Installers admitted that they were guilty. Mr Breytenbach (“Breytenbach”) was present when the Installers signed a document admitting guilt and entered into a mutual separation agreement with the respondent.
The proper procedure is for old signs to be returned to the respondent to await further instruction from the client re handling of same. 
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 258
The applicant did not admit guilt. He was issued with a notice to attend a disciplinary hearing. Such notice is usually read to employees and outlines the employee’s rights. Breytenbach was not present when the applicant was given the disciplinary hearing notice.
The owner advised staff that intimidation and threatening behaviour will not be condoned and he dealt with such incidents in the past. 
The applicant worked well. There was an occasion when the applicant used the respondent’s credit card without authorisation. The applicant reimbursed the respondent for this transaction.

Mr Brummer, investigator 
Mr Brummer (“Brummer”) carried out the investigation. He interviewed all the Installers individually. The interviews were recorded. At the start of the interview Brummer asked the Installer to make a statement on video. He then activated the video recorder. He captured the name of the Installer, enquired if they sought a representative and/or interpreter, confirmed that they were making the statement voluntarily and that they were fully conscious and sober. The Installers were not forced to make a statement. He asked them specific questions relating to the allegations. 
Five (Daniel, Moses, Sipho, Sebonego and Mike) of the twelve installers who were interviewed implicated the applicant. They relayed different incidents of theft where they and the applicant were involved.
The applicant refused to make a statement on video. The applicant denied any involvement and did not implicate anyone else. Brummer disputed the applicant’s version that Brummer called the SAPS. Brummer did tell the employees that the respondent reserved the right to involve the SAPS if there was any theft. Brummer could not confirm if the applicant only worked on a team with Moses when he worked in South Africa. However the colleagues said that the applicant was present when the items were sold and he shared in the proceeds of the sale.
Brummer and Breytenbach were present when the applicant was given his notice to attend a disciplinary hearing. This notice reflects the applicant’s rights. 
The video recordings of the interviews were played at the applicant’s disciplinary hearing. During the hearing they attempted to telephonically contact all the colleagues whose video recordings were shown at the applicant’s hearing in order to give the applicant an opportunity to cross-examine these persons. They successfully contacted some of the colleagues. 
The video recordings were kept by Mr Kane, an employee of the respondent, after the disciplinary hearing. The recordings were lost prior to the arbitration hearing. 
As per the recording, Daniel said that two signs were sold (see page 10, Bundle “R” for the summary of the disciplinary hearing). The applicant saw the transaction taking place. The applicant shared in the proceeds of the sale but Daniel could not recall the exact amount. Telephonically Daniel confirmed that the applicant was involved, but that Brummer forced him to make a statement.  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 259
Moses relied on an interpreter for this interview as captured on the video recording. Brummer could think of no reason for the interpreter to not interpret accurately. During the recording Moses said that scrap was sold for R280 two months before the interview. The applicant was present. Daniel and Bongani each got R50 and the applicant got the balance of the money. A similar thing happened on four occasions. When contacted telephonically Moses confirmed that they did visit the scrapyard. The applicant’s version was that he was working in Africa during the time mentioned by Moses, he was not present when the scrap was sold. Brummer maintained that Moses implicated the applicant.
As per the video recording, Sipho said that company product was sold to the scrapyard. The last occasion was about a month before the interview. Sipho got R200 from the sale and the applicant and Mike also received money from the sale. 
During the recorded interview Sebenego said that they often sold company products. This happened a day before the interview. A number of employees, including the applicant, were involved.
As per the video recording, Mike said that they sold scrap on more than ten occasions. They shared the money with a number of employees including the applicant. When contacted telephonically Mike said that the sale of products never happened after the applicant was re-employed.
Towards the end of the disciplinary hearing the applicant, for the first time, said that he was aware that his colleagues sold signs to buy uniforms. He said that he knew this was wrong. He said that if he had reported this the respondent would have taken steps to discipline the employees and improve procedures.
The Installers who were interviewed signed mutual separation agreements and did not refer a case to the MEIBC. It was unlikely that all the Installers would wrongly implicate the applicant. 

Applicant’s evidence

Mr Tshabangu, the applicant
The applicant confirmed that in 2010 a group of employees, including him, sold scrap. The owner asked them to tell the truth. They told the truth and were dismissed. In 2012 the respondent called the applicant to return to work. The owner told him to never steal again. He never stole again. 
In 2017 Jackie stole cable. The applicant reported this to the owner. Jackie was dismissed.
The applicant at times worked in Cameroon. He was not in South Africa from around 5 March to 5 April 2021. From 5 April 2021 he worked in South Africa. At the end of May 2021 he worked in Lesotho for a few days. After he returned from Cameroon he saw Sipho and Mike wearing new uniforms. When the applicant commented on the nice uniforms, they said that they sold a pylon (sign) to buy the new uniforms.  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 260
The applicant agreed that as the disciplinary hearing was conducted in July 2021, the two months prior, as referred to by Moses, was around May 2021, when the applicant was in South Africa.
The applicant worked in a crew with Moses only, so it was not possible for him to be involved with theft with other Installers. 
The applicant was called to the boardroom. Brummer introduced himself as a detective. Brummer asked the applicant about the items he stole. The applicant replied that he did not steal. Brummer said he had guys who said the applicant stole. Brummer left the office. The applicant could hear Brummer speaking on the telephone saying “I have got 13 guys. Bring at least two vans.” Brummer returned to the room and said that he had called the police and the police were coming to fetch all of them. The applicant said that he did not steal anything.
Amos, the manager, Brummer and Breytenbach were present when the applicant was given the notice to attend a disciplinary hearing (page 1, Bundle “R”). He refused to sign. The notice was not read or explained and he did not read it. He conceded that he did “put it together” and he knew that the charges related to the interview with Brummer. 
Whilst the disciplinary hearing notification refers to the right to representation, he did not feel like he needed a representative and he confirmed this at the disciplinary hearing.
The applicant agreed that they contacted his colleagues telephonically during the disciplinary hearing so that the applicant could cross examine his colleagues. When Moses was contacted telephonically he said that they sold nothing and that he was forced to say what he said during the video recording. Similarly, Daniel explained during the telephone conversation that Brummer forced them to make a statement. The telephone call with Sipho is not recorded in the disciplinary hearing minutes but Sipho also said that they, together with the applicant, sold signs in 2010. Mike explained that they never sold products after the applicant was re-employed so the ten incidents happened before/around 2010.
The respondent’s version was that most likely the colleagues told the truth on video but told a different story after they left the respondent as they were upset. The applicant explained that after the disciplinary hearing Amos asked him for the telephone numbers of the installers who left the employ of the respondent as the respondent might decide to give them a second chance.

Analysis of evidence and argument
As per section 192(2) of the Act the employer is required to prove that the dismissal is fair. 
The applicant challenged the procedural fairness of his dismissal on the basis that he was not notified of the allegations and he was not entitled to the assistance of a fellow employee at the disciplinary hearing.
Item 4 of Schedule 8, the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal, hereinafter referred to as the “Code”, requires an employer to notify the employee  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 261
  of the allegations using a form and language that the employee can reasonably understand. Furthermore the employee is entitled to the assistance of a trade union representative or fellow employee. 
The applicant was found guilty of dishonesty. This a broad charge, devoid of any specifics. However, the applicant himself conceded that he “put it together” and concluded that the disciplinary hearing was about the interview with Brummer. I find that the applicant was not prejudiced by the respondent charging him with dishonesty without any specific details. 
The applicant acknowledged that he received the disciplinary hearing notification. As pointed out by Brummer, the notice outline’s the applicant’s rights, including the right to representation. The applicant confirmed at the disciplinary hearing that he did not require representation. I therefore find that the applicant was entitled to representation. 
Accordingly, I find the dismissal procedurally fair. 
The applicant challenged substantive fairness on the basis that he was not guilty of dishonesty. 
The applicant was not charged with “derivative conduct” or failing to disclose the misconduct of his colleagues. 
I have considered the charge against the applicant in the context of the judgment in EOH Abantu (Pty) Ltd v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and others (JA4/18) [2019] ZALAC 57; (2019) 40 ILJ 2477 (LAC); [2019] 12 BLLR 1304 (LAC) (15 August 2019) reads:

“It normally will be sufficient if the employee has adequate notice and information to ascertain what act of misconduct he is alleged to have committed. The categorisation by the employer of the alleged misconduct is of less importance. Employers embarking on disciplinary proceedings, not being skilled legal practitioners, sometimes define or restrict the alleged misconduct too narrowly or incorrectly. For example, it is not uncommon for an employee to be charged with theft and for the evidence at the disciplinary enquiry or arbitration to establish the offence of unauthorised possession or use of company property. The principle in such cases is that provided a workplace standard has been contravened, which the employee knew (or reasonably should have known) could form the basis for discipline, and no significant prejudice flowed from the incorrect characterisation, an appropriate disciplinary sanction may be imposed. It will be enough if the employee is informed that the disciplinary enquiry arose out of the fact that on a certain date, time and place he is alleged to have acted wrongfully or in breach of applicable rules or standards. In short, there is no requirement that competent verdicts on disciplinary charges should be mentioned in the charge sheet – subject though to the general principle that the employee should not be prejudiced. Prejudice normally will only arise where the employee has been denied knowledge of the case he had to meet. Prejudice is absent if the record shows that had the employee been alerted to the possibility of a competent verdict on a disciplinary charge he would not have conducted his defence any differently or would not have had any other defence.”

Based on the aforementioned judgment, the question is then whether or not the applicant is guilty of contravening a workplace rule. In essence the respondent is relying on the duty of good faith inherent in the employment contract which was dealt with in Western Platinum Refinery Ltd v  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 262
  Hlebela and others (2015) 36 ILJ 2280 (LAC) [also reported at [2015] 9 BLLR 940 (LAC) – Ed] which reads:

“In my view, an appropriate way to discipline an employee who has actual knowledge of the wrongdoing of others or who has actual knowledge of information which the employee subjectively knows is relevant to unlawful conduct against the employer’s interests would be to charge that employee with a material breach of the duty of good faith, particularising the knowledge allegedly possessed and alleging a culpable non-disclosure. This observation does not mean that the gravamen of such a charge might not also be articulated in another way, provided it is plain what is alleged and why it is alleged to be culpable.” 

I have contrasted the aforementioned judgment with a more recent judgment namely NUMSA obo Nganezi and others v Dunlop Mixing and Technical Services (Pty) Ltd and others 2019 (8) BCLR 966 (CC); (2019) 40 ILJ 1957 (CC); [2019] 9 BLLR 865 (CC) which reads:

“But the contractual duty of good faith as a legal precept does not as a matter of law imply the imposition of a unilateral fiduciary obligation on employees to disclose known information of misconduct of their co-employees to their employers. That is because the legal contractual obligation of good faith is a contested one and must, at the very least, be of a reciprocal nature . . . Here the imposition of unilateral fiduciary obligations on either employees or employers could justifiably be seen as a choice favouring only one side, especially in matters relating to collective bargaining and recourse to strikes or lockouts. Applied to the context of a violent strike, it requires a recognition of the impact of the violence on both employer and employee. It is a fraught issue and it is a wise but also proper legal caution to remember that fair labour practices under the Constitution mean fair labour practices for employee and employer alike . . . In the context of a strike, the imposition of a duty to disclose would undermine the collective bargaining power of workers by requiring positive action in the interests of the employer without any concomitant obligation on the part of the employer to give something reciprocally similar to the workers . . . To expect employees to be their employer’s keeper in the context of a strike where worker solidarity plays an important role in the power play between worker and employer would be asking too much without some reciprocal obligation on an employer’s part . . . In the context of a strike, an employer’s reciprocal duty of good faith would require, at the very least, that employees’ safety should be guaranteed before expecting them to come forward and disclose information or exonerate themselves. Circumstances would truly have to be exceptional for this reciprocal duty of good faith to be jettisoned in favour of only a unilateral duty on the employee to disclose information.”

With regards to the matter before me I prefer the Western Platinum Refinery Ltd v Hlebela and others (2015) 36 ILJ 2280 (LAC) [also reported at [2015] 9 BLLR 940 (LAC) – Ed] judgment. The applicant was aware that what Mike and Sipho had done was wrong and that he could assist the respondent to deal with this misconduct and improve procedures by making this known to the respondent. The NUMSA obo Nganezi and others v Dunlop Mixing and Technical Services (Pty) Ltd and others 2019 (8) BCLR 966 (CC); (2019) 40 ILJ 1957 (CC); [2019] 9 BLLR 865 (CC) judgment deals with the duty of good faith specifically in the context of a  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 263
  violent strike and focuses on the reciprocal duty of good faith under circumstances where the employee’s safety may be at risk. In the matter before me the applicant has not provided an acceptable explanation for not disclosing the information about his colleagues. The applicant did not testify that he was afraid to “whistle blow”. Furthermore Breytenbach’s testimony that the respondent made it known that it does not condone intimidation and threatening behaviour and has dealt with this in the past was not disputed. This shows that the respondent has taken steps in the past to safeguard employees. 
I accordingly find the applicant guilty of dishonesty in that he failed to disclose theft by his colleagues when he became aware of this or during the investigation conducted by Brummer.
The respondent’s case is that the applicant himself is guilty of dishonesty (in this instance theft) as he was implicated by his colleagues. 
In the matter before me the applicant confirmed that he viewed the video footage, was present when the telephone calls were made and that the summary of disciplinary hearing accurately reflects the aforementioned. That the respondent was not able to show the video footage at the arbitration hearing is not fatal to its case given the aforementioned confirmation by the applicant. 
The respondent relied on the testimony of Brummer who conducted the interviews. However the colleagues who implicated the applicant did not testify at the arbitration. Brummer has first-hand knowledge of the interviews but not first-hand knowledge of the applicant’s alleged involvement in theft. 
In considering whether or not to admit the hearsay evidence about the theft I have taken into account the judgment in NUM obo Kgapeng v Commissioner For Conciliation, Mediation And Arbitration and others (C814/06) [2010] ZALCJHB which reads:

“Hearsay evidence in our law is governed by the provisions of section 3(1) of the Law of Evidence Amendment Act 45 of 1988 (‘LEAA’) which provides that hearsay evidence shall not be admitted as evidence, unless the party against whom such is to be adduced agrees to its admission, the person upon whose credibility the probative value of the evidence depends testifies or:

The court having regard to – (i) The nature of the proceedings, (ii) The nature of the evidence: (iii) The purpose for which the evidence is tendered, (iv) The probative value of the evidence, (v) The reason why the evidence is not given by the person upon whose credibility the probative value of such evidence depends, (vi) Any prejudice to a party which the admission of such evidence might entail-, and (vii) Any other factor which should in the opinion of the court be taken into account is of the opinion that such evidence should be admitted in the interests of justice.’ 

It is now well established that arbitration proceedings are covered by the provisions of the LEAA”.

In considering whether or not to admit the hearsay evidence I have taken into account the nature of the proceedings. I am mindful that an arbitration hearing is not a criminal or civil proceeding and that in terms of  
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 264
  section 138(1) of the Act a commissioner “. . . must deal with the substantive merits of the dispute with the minimum of legal formalities.” The evidence of the applicant’s colleagues implicating him in theft is relevant to the issues in dispute, thus supporting a decision to admit this hearsay evidence. 
The respondent provided an acceptable explanation for the colleagues not testifying at the arbitration hearing.
The prejudice to the applicant is diminished as the applicant was given an opportunity to cross examine his colleagues during the disciplinary hearing and this was captured in the disciplinary hearing summary, albeit not verbatim.
I, therefore, conclude that it is in the interest of justice to admit the hearsay evidence. I will place some weight on the evidence of Daniel, Moses and Mike as both parties agreed that the applicant cross-examined these colleagues telephonically. I will place very little weight on the evidence of Sebenego as both parties agreed that he was not cross-examined telephonically as well as the evidence of Sipho as only the applicant testified that he was cross examined telephonically, noting that this is not reflected in the disciplinary hearing summary which the applicant admitted. 
The applicant claims, in essence, that he is not guilty as his colleagues were forced to make the statements on video. Brummer testified that the applicant’s colleagues, at the start of the video recording, confirmed that they made the statements voluntarily. This is specifically noted in the summary of Daniel’s video recording on page 10, Bundle “R”. The applicant confirmed that the summary of the disciplinary hearing was accurate. It is noted that the colleagues, when faced with cross examination by the applicant, whom they had accused of theft, said that they were forced to make the statement and in some instances amended their statements. 
Brummer disputed the applicant’s version that he called the SAPS. Brummer clarified that he told the employees that the respondent reserved its right to involve SAPS if there was theft. 
An employer threatening an employee with criminal proceedings was dealt with in Nokeng Tsa Taemane Local Municipality v Louw NO and others (JA7/16) [2018] ZALAC 37; [2019] 1 BLLR 35 (LAC) (17 October 2018) which reads:

“The threat of civil and criminal proceedings in relation to financial misconduct cannot reasonably constitute a threat rendering continued employment intolerable. By posing the threat, the municipality aimed at avoiding what might have been a lengthy disciplinary hearing; but also quite legitimately signalled that it reserved its rights to pursue criminal or civil proceedings in the event of financial impropriety being established at the disciplinary hearing. The municipality was entitled to adopt this stance in that it potentially had a legal obligation to follow such a course. Its conduct was legitimate, appropriate and defensible and of an order that an employee might reasonably be expected to put up with it. Any employee who is accused of illegal activities or financial impropriety may ordinarily expect that the employer has various options, be they disciplinary, civil and/or criminal. The standpoint of the Labour Court that the municipality acted unreasonably in posing such a threat 

 
[2022] 3 BALR 254 (MEIBC) at 265

is hence untenable. If Louw were innocent, he could have faced discipline and avoided criminal and civil proceedings.”

  Whilst this case deals with constructive dismissal it is my considered view that the principle applies in the matter before me. There was nothing untoward in Brummer informing the applicant’s colleagues that the respondent reserved its right to pursue criminal proceedings. 

Having considered the aforementioned I find that the applicant’s colleagues made their recorded statements implicating the applicant voluntarily and that the statement made by Brummer regarding criminal proceedings was acceptable. I therefore find, on balance of probabilities, that the applicant was involved in the theft as outlined by his colleagues in their interview as recorded. I will accept the version as per the recording over the telephonic version. 
The applicant discounted Moses’s evidence on the basis that he, the applicant, was not in South Africa at the time of the theft. However, it is clear from the applicant’s evidence that he was present in South Africa around this time. 
I, accordingly, find the applicant guilty of dishonesty in that he was involved in the theft of company products as implicated by his colleagues. 
The applicant did not dispute the appropriateness of the sanction for theft.
In summary, I find the applicant’s dismissal procedurally and substantively fair. 

Arbitration award
I find that the applicant’s dismissal was procedurally and substantively fair. 
The matter is dismissed. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document