



SACCAWU obo Sikhundla / Radisson BLU Hotel Waterfront [2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA)
Judgments Online

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: WECT 18114-09
Hearing Date(s): None Indicated
Award Date(s): 21 / 04 / 2010
Before: Commissioner T Jamodien


Keywords


Labour Law — Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Bringing employer's name into disrepute — Employee falsely and maliciously accusing employer of racism in letter to Minister of Labour — Dismissal fair

Mini Summary


The applicant employee, a housekeeping manager and chair of the hotel's equity committee, was dismissed for writing a letter to the Minister of Labour in which he claimed that a superior had uttered a racist comment and that the respondent was discriminating against certain applicants for employment. The letter was written after an employee had been taken to task by management for wearing traditional beads in violation of the hotel's dress code. The employee claimed that after the manager had uttered the alleged racist comment to that employee, he felt constrained to take the matter up with the authorities, as well as other complaints regarding the respondent's failure to implement affirmative action.

Regarding the charge that the employee had falsely claimed that the manager concerned had uttered a racist comment, the commissioner found it strange that the matter had not been immediately taken up by the employee and the union. Instead, the allegation had surfaced much later. The commissioner noted that the manager, who denied uttering the comment, had agreed to undergo a polygraph test, whereas the applicant had refused to do so to prove the contrary. The commissioner noted that, just as racist comments undermine attempts to bridge divides between members of a workforce, so too do false allegations of racism undermine such attempts. The commissioner found that the applicant was guilty of making a false allegation.

Turning to the charge arising from the letter to the minister, the commissioner rejected the employee's claim that he had afforded management an opportunity to respond to the allegations, as required by the rules of the employment equity committee, by slipping a letter under the MD's door. The employee had shown a cavalier disregard of the committee's rules, and had capitalised on the feelings of impressionable employees to obtain a "mandate" to send the letter. After the Department of Labour had interceded in the dispute and resolved the matter, there was no cause to go to the extreme of appealing directly to the minister.

The commissioner held further that, although employees are entitled to challenge the authority of their employers in appropriate circumstances, they also owe a duty to their employers to conduct themselves responsibility when publicly criticising them. The employee had acted irresponsibility, dishonestly, and in a manner calculated to embarrass the respondent. He had unjustifiably portrayed the respondent as a laager of discrimination, and had shown scant respect for the employer's efforts to transform its' top management. By so doing, the employee maliciously tried to damage the respondent's good name.

The commissioner found further that the cumulative effects of the offences of which the employee had been found guilty had irreparably destroyed the employment relationship, and warranted dismissal.

The employee's dismissal was upheld.

 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 3




Award

Particulars of proceedings and representation

[1]    The arbitration hearing was held on 5 March 2010 and 1 April 2010 at the offices of the CCMA in Cape Town. The applicant, Raymond Sikhundla, was represented by Jean Baker, a trade union official with SACCAWU. The respondent, Radisson Blu Hotel Waterfront, was represented by Luke Brodziak, an official of FEDHASA, an employer's organisation.

[2]    The parties had signed a pre-arbitration agreement. Bundles of documents were submitted, the contents of which were admitted unless specifically contested. The proceedings were digitally recorded.

The issue in dispute

[3]    The issue to determine is whether the applicant's dismissal was substantively and procedurally fair.

Background to the dispute

[4]    The applicant was employed by respondent as a housekeeping supervisor. His employment commenced on 29 October 2002. He earned a monthly salary of R4 800.

[5]    The applicant was also the chairperson of the respondent's Employment Equity Committee and was a signatory to the respondent's Employment Equity Plan as well as the ground rules of the Employment Equity Committee. He was a member of the Employment Equity Committee for four years.

[6]    On 12 September 2009, an issue arose with a colleague Zolelwa Mpofu who arrived at work after a period of leave, wearing traditional beads with her uniform. Apparently this was in contravention of the dress code of respondent and a subsequent meeting was held with the human resources manager, Janice Turner, where the applicant was present. He later alleged that Ms Turner had uttered a racist remark to the effect: "you black people you think that you are on your own world."

[7]    On or about 9 November 2009, acting in his capacity as chairperson of the Employment Equity Committee, the applicant addressed a letter of complaint to the Minister of Labour. Therein he made certain allegations that respondent was acting in a discriminatory manner with regards to appointments of staff and he also mentioned the remark allegedly uttered by Ms Turner.

 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 4

[8]    Pursuant to the letter, two Department of Labour officials attended a meeting at respondent's premises on 19 November 2009. Amongst others, the applicant and the general manager, Chris Pike, were present.

[9]    Arising from the sequence of events, the applicant was charged on 3 December 2009 with:

making false and/or unfounded defamatory allegations of racism against an employee of the hotel.
Abusing his authority as chairperson of the Employment Equity Committee (by making unfounded allegations against respondent to the Minister of Labour).
Bringing the respondent into disrepute.

[10]    A disciplinary hearing was held on 8 December 2009 and was chaired by an external chairperson. The applicant was found guilty of the allegations and dismissed on 10 December 2009.

Summary of evidence and argument

I have considered all the evidence and argument, but because section 138(7) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 ("LRA") requires an award to be issued with brief reasons for the findings, I shall only refer to the evidence and argument that I regard as necessary to substantiate my findings and the determination of the dispute.

Respondent's evidence

[11]    Jeanette van Niekerk testified. She is employed as an assistant housekeeper but since June 2009 she has been occupying the position of acting executive housekeeper. She was also the applicant's supervisor.

[12]    Ms Van Niekerk said that she was present in the meeting on 14 September pertaining to the issue of Ms Mpofu wearing traditional beads around her head, neck, wrists and ankles. Also present at the meeting were Ms Turner, Ms Mpofu and the applicant. Essentially, Ms Van Niekerk testified that the wearing of beads was against the respondent's dress code and therefore the matter had to be addressed. It emerged that the reason for Ms Mpofu wearing the beads was that she was training to be a Sangoma and wearing the beads was an important aspect thereof.

[13]    At the meeting, various options were looked at such as Ms Mpofu wearing trousers as she had previously done. Ms Mpofu had said that she could no longer wear trousers as it was apparently not appropriate for female Sangoma's. Ms Mpofu was given the option of taking unpaid leave while completing her Sangoma training, which she also refused. She also refused to button up her shirt to cover the beads around her neck. Ms Turner also allowed Ms Mpofu and the applicant to alert her to any other legislation that she was unaware of relating to people's rights to practice their culture.

[14]    Ms Van Niekerk said that Ms Mpofu was issued with a written warning for her breach of the dress code policy. The warning was later withdrawn.

 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 5

Ms Van Niekerk refuted any suggestion of racist remarks or derogatory statements having been uttered by Ms Turner.

[15]    Ms Janice Turner, human resources manager, testified. She is also the responsible manager for employment equity and a member of the Employment Equity Committee.

[16]    Ms Turner spoke about the meeting concerning Ms Mpofu's wearing of traditional beads. On the whole her evidence on this score mirrored that of Ms Van Niekerk. She also added that during the meeting she had taken umbrage at a remark made by the applicant that Ms Mpofu knew an important person at the SABC. She construed this to be a threat and felt uncomfortable with the comment. The issue, in fact, landed up in the newspapers some time later.

[17]    Ms Turner said that although Ms Mpofu was issued with a warning at the meeting, a further meeting was held on 4 November 2009 with Crosby Booi, a senior official of SACCAWU. At this meeting, it was agreed that the warning would be removed and that Ms Mpofu would wear long skirts over her ankle beads, would not wear beads on her head and would be permitted to wear beads around her neck and wrists. The applicant, not being a shop steward, was not party to this meeting. Thus the issue concerning Ms Mpofu was finally resolved.

[18]    Ms Turner said that she was present at a meeting with Department of Labour ("DOL") officials held on 19 November 2009. She also took the minutes of this meeting. The meeting was called by the DOL as part of an investigation into claims made by the applicant in a letter addressed to the Minister of Labour. The letter was date-stamped by DOL as received on 9 November 2009. Ms Turner said that the letter was given to them to read at this meeting and that neither she nor Mr Pike had any prior knowledge of it. Pertinent parts of the letter read as follows:

"My concerns are as follows:

They advertised a job for a restaurant manager and they specified that they want an Affirmative Action Candidate, they went and found an outsider (White guy) and I quote they didn't find the right candidate to do the job although we had an assistant restaurant manager (Black guy) doing the job without hiccups at all.
In the housekeeping department they advertise a lot of positions and we were promised once again that they were going to develop someone within yet was not done as promised.
Believe me we are facing a lot of discrimination at this hotel. We are trying by all means to talk to them but we are not breaking through.
We were told that a black person will never be an Executive Manager at this hotel.
We had a disagreement with them about our culture, our colleague had a calling (Sangoma) worked for the company for 4 years as a linen keeper they tried all means to fire her, embarrass her, treating her like a criminal, they took her dignity to the mud, but the law was on her side she won the case but that is not the point, the point is they don't respect our culture. HR Manager's words: you black people you think you are on your own world. " 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 6

[19]    Ms Turner said that she was never consulted as a senior manager responsible for employment equity and as a member of the Employment Equity Committee, regarding the sending of the letter to the Minister of Labour. She denied ever receiving an invitation from the applicant to a meeting to discuss any problems, neither was she made aware of a meeting request by Mr Pike.

[20]    Ms Turner referred to the ground rules of the Employment Equity Committee wherein it prescribed how urgent meetings should be called and that all decisions should be preferably reached by consensus. In the absence of consensus being reached, the Committee may vote on the issue provided that a quorum exists which would be nine of the eleven members being present at the meeting. The matter should then be referred to the senior manager for a final decision.

[21]    Ms Turner said that she first became aware of allegations of racist statements attributed to her at the DOL meeting on 19 November 2009. She adamantly denied making such remarks and agreed that those remarks are racist and demeaning. She also said that no grievance was ever made against her after the meeting with Ms Mpofu on 14 September 2009. At the DOL meeting, she immediately volunteered to do a polygraph test to prove her innocence. She did the test and was found to have "no deception. " The applicant declined to do the polygraph test, even though the employment contract advises employee's to submit to one in the event that their integrity is questioned.

[22]    Christopher Pike, general manager of respondent, testified. He has been in the position for two years and was appointed from abroad. He had initially become aware of Ms Mpofu wearing beads and asked Ms Turner to deal with the matter. The first he heard about the letter to the Minister of Labour was when Ms Turner informed him that the DOL requested to meet. He read the letter for the first time at the meeting on 19 November 2009. He denied that he had ever received an invitation to a meeting from the applicant to discuss urgent employment equity matters. He confirmed that he was a member of the Employment Equity Committee.

[23]    Mr Pike responded to all the allegations made in the letter to the Minister of Labour. He confirmed that the position of restaurant manager was advertised during September 2009. The erstwhile assistant restaurant manager, one Thabo, was interviewed but was unsuccessful. It was felt that Thabo did not have the necessary experience at the time to manage a high profile restaurant such as the respondent's. There were also concerns around his cash-handling and guest relation skills. It was felt that more a more experienced person should be appointed. Thabo was given proper feedback and had not laid any subsequent grievances. The appointment was also dealt with by the Employment Equity Committee.

[24]    With regards the complaint around positions in the housekeeping department, Mr Pike asserted that there was no guarantee to positions. The respondent had a supervisory development programme and attempted to develop staff. He said that the applicant had applied for the Senior  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 7
Supervisor position but was not selected. No grievances were raised thereafter  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 8
neither could he recall this matter being raised at the Employment Equity Committee.

[25]    Regarding the third complaint around "discrimination, " Mr Pike was uncertain what this pertained to. However, he surmised that it may have to do with the issue of a foreign general manager or a South African general manager being appointed at respondent. He said that the appointment of the next general manager would be for the owner's of respondent to decide.

[26]    As for the fourth complaint around the applicant being told that "a black person will never be an Executive Manager, " Mr Pike said that he was livid at this remark and asked the applicant in the meeting to whom the remark was attributed. The applicant responded that "he wrote this wrong, " implying that he had erred when he wrote it. Mr Pike said that he took the remark seriously and said that he would never tolerate any racial discrimination being perpetuated at respondent's hotel. He also made reference to the respondent's employment equity plan wherein targets and time-frames were set for transforming the management team. He said that respondent was serious about employment equity.

[27]    With regards to the racist remark attributed to Ms Turner, Mr Pike said that it had first come to his attention at the DOL meeting. No previous grievance was ever raised. He confronted Ms Turner in the meeting who vigorously denied making such remarks. She immediately volunteered to do a polygraph test which she subsequently passed. The applicant declined to do the polygraph test. He said that on balance, it appeared that the allegation of racist remarks made by Ms Turner was a false one, and therefore he had not put charges against her. Rather it appeared to him that the applicant was at fault for making false accusations.

[28]    Mr Pike said that he believed the applicant wrote the letter to the Minister of Labour in his capacity as chairperson of the respondent's Employment Equity Committee. He made mention of his status in the letter. Thus he appears to have been writing on behalf of all the members of the Employment Equity Committee. Mr Pike said that the manner in which these issues were raised with the Minister of Labour was in contradiction of the ground rules of the Employment Equity Committee which in itself has a dispute resolution mechanism which was not used. Furthermore the applicant had not sought an urgent meeting of the committee neither did the applicant raise these issues with him informally, even though he had easy access to Mr Pike. He denied ever receiving an invitation under his door, to a meeting of the Employment Equity Committee.

[29]    Mr Anthony McKinnon, a purchasing manager and member of the Employment Equity Committee, testified. He said that he was unaware of any meeting held to discuss the drafting of the letter to the Minister of Labour. He was told by the applicant that a letter was sent.

Applicant's evidence

[30]    Mr Raymond Sikhundla, the applicant, testified that he was present at the meeting on 14 September 2009 where he claimed that Ms Turner had  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 9
made the racist comment. He felt sad and angry and said that what she was saying "was not right." The meeting, however, continued. He said that options were put on the table and that Ms Turner also commented around Europeans who wear tattoos. The DOL meeting minutes reflect him saying that he had written the comment down. However, at arbitration he refuted this and questioned the veracity of the minutes.

[31]    On this issue, the applicant was questioned as to why his response that Ms Turner's comments "was not right" as well as her thoughts around "Europeans" was not tested with Ms Turner during her cross-examination, neither were these comments captured in the minutes of the DOL meeting. The applicant's stock response was that Ms Turner, who took the minutes in that meeting, had not accurately recorded the discussions. He also said that he had not mentioned the SABC in the meeting but had spoken about the High Court. He also could not sufficiently answer why a grievance had not immediately been lodged around the alleged racist comment. He said he was on leave for about one month, but that the matter was reported verbally to a shop steward, Mervyn, who apparently did not take the matter further. The issue was also not specifically mentioned in a supposed invitation that he had sent to Mr Pike for an Employment Equity Committee meeting. He also refused to do a polygraph test as he had done nothing wrong, although his contract of employment makes mention of the need for an employee to conduct a polygraph when matters concerning the trust relationship between the parties are at stake.

[32]    The applicant said that he held a meeting in the canteen with members of the Committee who said he should write a letter to Mr Pike inviting him to an urgent Employment Equity Committee meeting. This letter was put under Mr Pike's door on 3 November 2009, in the presence of a colleague, Abraham. It said that the issues to be discussed were:

" Executive housekeeping post;

Assistant housekeeping post was not advertised;

Shirley Fortuin's nomination

Feedback on Zolelwa's issues"

[33]    The applicant said that Ms Turner came back to him afterwards and said that a meeting could not be held as the hotel was in mid-season and they were too busy. He then arranged for the other members to meet in the canteen. Two members were apparently on leave and he phoned them to gain their proxy. Five members were present at the meeting. Mr Pike and Ms Turner were not present. A decision was made by vote to write a letter to the Minister of Labour. Minutes were not held of these meetings. He said he informed Mr Mckinnon about the letter before it was written and did not know why he would say that he was notified afterwards.

[34]    The applicant said that the reason for writing the letter was because he wanted resolution to the issues around affirmative action. He felt it was his right and prerogative to address staff problems. He also felt that he was being charged because the respondent was not used to a "black man asking questions."

 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 10

[35]    During cross-examination on the issue of the letter to the Minister of Labour, it was pointed out to the applicant that he had flouted many of the ground rules of the Employment Equity Committee pertaining to quorums, decision-making protocol, the need to have a resolution sent to Mr Pike for consideration, etc. He went to great lengths to dispute this.

[36]    The applicant said that many of the issues raised in the letter to the Minister of Labour were resolved but that he had written it to show the respondent's tendencies. He denied that he was disgruntled at not getting the Senior Supervisor job. He claimed to have raised issues at the DOL meeting pertaining to a colleague, Sigoso, who apparently was not treated well. The minutes make no mention of him raising this as an example of discrimination in respondent's business. He once again disputed the truthfulness of the minutes. He also said that he mentioned to the DOL officials that Mr Pike had made the comment that black people will never be Executive Managers, however, the minutes reflect that he said that "he wrote it wrong."

[37]    The applicant only produced the letter to Mr Pike at arbitration for the first time. He responded that the letter was not sought at his disciplinary hearing. The hearing minutes also did not reflect him talking about this letter. He said that the hearing minutes were incorrect.

[38]    Ms Zolelwa Mpofu testified to her calling as a Sangoma and the need for her to wear the beads. She spoke about the meeting that was held and said that the racist comments were made by Ms Turner. She was upset and left the meeting. She reported the comments to Mervyn, the shop steward. She did not lodge a grievance as "she did not want to waste her time because the company would not have done anything about it. " She also attributed a comment to Ms Van Niekerk during 2009 who said that the employees were like "monkeys waiting for baboons."

[39]    Mr Mervyn Abrahams, a shop steward testified that he was on leave when Ms Mpofu's incident occurred. He was told about the racist comment but thought it was "pointless" to raise a grievance because they did not trust the internal procedures.

[40]    Mr Abraham Sephula, a member of the Employment Equity Committee testified that he was present when the applicant put the letter under Mr Pike's door on 3 November 2009. He was not made aware of the racist comment made by Ms Turner and heard about it later. He said that the idea to write a letter to the Minister of Labour was mooted in a meeting with certain members of the Employment Equity Committee. He said minutes of the meetings were held. He agreed however, during cross-examination that the meetings and decisions did not accord with the ground rules.

Analysis of the evidence and argument

Charge 1

[41]    The first charge relates to the allegation that Ms Turner had uttered racist comments to the effect, "you black people think you are on your own  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 11
world" at a meeting on 14 September 2009. The applicant and Ms Mpofu testified that this comment was made whilst Ms Turner and Ms Van Niekerk deny that the comment was ever made.

[42]    It is startling that if the comment were indeed made, that no further concrete action was taken by either Ms Mpofu or the applicant in the form of a grievance or taking the matter to Mr Pike who was easily accessible to them. Their evidence that the remark was shared with a shop steward, Mervyn Abrahams, appears to be a fallacy as Mr Abrahams, himself, did nothing about the matter. What makes their evidence further incredulous, is that Ms Mpofu's matter around her wearing of the beads was dealt with on 4 November 2009 by a senior trade union official, Crosby Booi, to whom surely this comment would have been mentioned and who would rightfully have acted with vigour in bringing Ms Turner to book. However, it appears that Mr Booi was never made aware of the alleged racist comment, which raises grave doubts as to whether it was actually made. Furthermore, given the importance which the applicant and Ms Mpofu attached to the cultural tradition of wearing beads, one would reasonably expect that an attack on their dignity would have been dealt with in an equally vociferous manner and not brushed aside with a cynical retort by Ms Mpofu that she "did not want to waste her time because the company would not have done anything about it" or Mr Abrahams' response that a grievance would have been "pointless."

[43]    The remark only came to the knowledge of Mr Pike and Ms Turner at the DOL meeting on 19 November 2009, some two months after it was allegedly made. Ms Turner's immediate response was to submit herself to a polygraph test. The applicant on the other hand refused even though this was a matter where his and Ms Turner's integrity and trustworthiness was at stake. In this regard, it would have been in his interest to heed his employment contract which sought him to submit to the polygraph test in such circumstances. Although it is accepted that polygraph tests are not conclusive, when viewed against the backdrop of events, one is inclined to accept the results of the test as being a true reflection of Ms Turner's honesty and her denial that she had ever uttered such offensive words.

[44]    It is acknowledged that we struggle with issues of respect for diversity in our workplaces. We are easily alarmed when overt acts or comments are made of a racist nature as it attacks our attempts to build a society and workplaces wherein the dignity of all people are respected and protected. Conversely, when such false accusations of racism are made against individuals it similarly casts a bleak shadow over efforts to heal the rifts between people of various races. When they work together on a daily basis, such callous and dishonest claims open the way for work relationships to be fraught with disharmony and distrust in the same manner as would be caused by the commission of acts of racism.

[44]    In SA Chemical Workers Union & another v NCP Chlorochem (Pty) Ltd & others (2007) 28 ILJ 1308 (LC) at paragraph 27, the Court pronounced that:

"Racial harmony in the workplace must be of paramount importance to each and every employer and employee alike. Just as racist behaviour needs to be  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 12
rooted out, allowing employees willy-nilly to accuse fellow employees of being a racist . . . must be addressed with equal fervour by employers if such allegations are baseless and made without reasonable cause therefore. Clearly to allow such allegations to be made without there being a proper and reasonable basis therefore will be equally destructive to racial harmony in the workplace."

[46]    The Court further found that in cases of false accusations of racism, an employer could not reasonably be expected to continue to employ such an offending employee, making dismissal a reasonable sanction.

[47]    I find the applicant guilty of Charge 1.

Charge 2

[48]    The second charge related to the applicant abusing his authority as chairperson of the Employment Equity Committee. This particularly pertains to the manner in which the letter was written to the Minister of Labour.

[49]    I am convinced that the invitation dated 3 November 2009, which the applicant and Mr Sephula have testified, was put under Mr Pike's door, is a farce. I prefer Mr Pike's testimony that he had never received any such letter. It is strange that this letter only came to light at arbitration. The applicant's testimony that the letter was never sought at his hearing is opportunistic. Surely, the letter would have been an important part of his defence and would have been produced if it existed at the time. Secondly, the existence of this letter was never raised at the DOL meeting, neither do the minutes reflect that the applicant mentioned it. His response that the minutes were inaccurate is meek. Incidentally, I found it ludicrous that whenever the applicant was questioned on the minutes of the DOL meeting or that of his disciplinary hearing, he would question the veracity thereof on issues that he could not comfortably respond to. It was also inexplicable why the issues contained in this letter to Mr Pike and the letter to the Minister of Labour differed. I am convinced that the letter to Mr Pike was a sham and merely scribbled on a piece of paper in order to present a different version at arbitration.

[50]    I am prepared to accept that a meeting of sorts took place between certain members of the Employment Equity Committee. The evidence is clear that this meeting which happened in the canteen did not conform to the prescripts of the ground rules of the Employment Equity Committee. There was no quorum for decisions to be made. Furthermore, the decision-making process was not followed in that top management were not given the opportunity to vet the decision to send a letter to the Minister of Labour. Hence, this meeting can at best be described as an informal get together of impressionable employees under the cavalier leadership of the applicant.

[51]    When one considers that the applicant, as chairperson of the Employment Equity Committee, was vested with a responsibility to act with maturity and within the confines of the "rules of the game" to which he himself was party to drafting, then his actions cannot be condoned. He had gone beyond his appointed authority and had acted in a misguided fashion.

 
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 13

[52]    The applicant's argument that he had the right and prerogative to pursue his course of action on the basis that he has freedom of expression is a fallacious argument. This is particularly so when one has regard that most of the issues raised within the letter were matters which were dealt with by the parties. This view pertains to the issue of the restaurant manager position, the positions in the housekeeping department, which I am sure the applicant as an unsuccessful candidate was disgruntled about, and the matter concerning Ms Mpofu. The accusation that employees were told that a "black person will never be an Executive Manager" was vociferously denied by Mr Pike and not proven at all by the applicant. The minutes of the DOL meeting, which I accept as a true reflection shows that the applicant was questioned directly by Mr Pike about the source of that statement to which he responded that he had "written it wrong." Thus the issues in the letter, in my opinion, did not warrant him to have gone to such extremes as to write a letter to the Minister of Labour.

[53]    I find therefore that the applicant had abused his authority as chairperson of the Employment Equity Committee and is thus guilty of Charge 2.

Charge 3

[54]    The third charge relates to an allegation that the applicant had brought the respondent into disrepute.

[55]    At common law, an employee is expected to conduct himself in good faith and his actions should be in the furtherance of the business interest. In an interesting article, titled "Bringing the Employer into Disrepute" (2008) 29 ILJ 1605, Alan Rycroft contests that the common law duties are based on a unitarist concept of the master-slave employment relationship where the parties have shared interests and where employees are inherently obedient. He argues that the nature of the relationship has changed and that in the context of current labour relations where workplace democracy is on the rise and "whistleblowing" legislation has been promulgated that these duties are not necessarily cast in stone. Employees have the right to challenge employers and assert their own interests. However, I would venture that such rights are not unfettered and that employees when challenging the employer, has a fundamental duty to ensure that they do so in a manner which is well-founded and does not cause unwarranted harm to the employer's interests. Furthermore when exercising their freedom of expression, employees should ensure that they are honest and seek recourse in a manner which is responsible and guided by applicable legal or dispute resolution procedures.

[56]    In the present matter, the applicant has been found to act dishonestly and in an irresponsible manner which was surely done in order to cause embarrassment to the respondent. It is inexplicable why he failed to follow normal processes and address his concerns via the avenues available to him. There was no evidence to suggest that the respondent ran roughshod over employee rights or dealt with matters in dictatorial fashion. The door was always open for discussion and for continuous debate. In particular it does not appear that the respondent had scant  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 14
regard for employment equity and transformation. They had an equity plan, had a functioning  
[2010] JOL 25927 (CCMA) at 15
committee, were continuously developing staff and were working towards targets set to transform the upper tier of the organisation. Clearly along the way, stumbling blocks would occur such as in the matter of Ms Mpofu and the position of restaurant manager. But for applicant to have decided to go to extreme measures and write to the Minister of Labour and paint a skewed picture of an organisation characterised by rampant discrimination and a laager of racial oppression as was made out to be, was hugely disproportionate, unfair and dishonest.

[57]    I find that the calculated efforts of respondent was borne by malice and ill-intent. He attempted to cause harm to the good name of the respondent, and even though no direct damages were suffered because of it, other than falling under the spotlight of the DOL, his unwarranted actions had tarnished the good name of respondent and thereby brought the respondent into disrepute.

[58]    I find the applicant guilty on Charge 3.

[59]    I shall now deal with the appropriateness of dismissal as a sanction. The transgressions, individually and cumulatively are serious. The effect of the applicant's actions have been to damage the trust and good faith necessary for the continuation of the employment relationship. He abused his leadership position in an attempt to cause embarrassment to the respondent and his motives appear to have been vexatious. I accept that the applicant had 7 years experience, but in the circumstances I find no reason to interfere with the respondent's decision to dismiss the applicant. I find the applicant's dismissal to be substantively fair.

[60]    There was no evidence relating to a procedural challenge by the applicant. I accept therefore that the dismissal was also procedurally fair.

Award

[61]    Raymond Sikhundla was fairly dismissed, substantively and procedurally. His application is dismissed.

Appearance:
Jean Baker (At); Luke Brodziak (R)


End of Document