



Botha / Macsteel Trading (Pty) Ltd [2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Metal and Engineering Industries Bargaining Council, Johannesburg
Case No: MEGA3593
Date: 29/09/2006
Before: E Tlhotlhalemaje, Arbitrator
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Appeal — Presiding officer at appeal hearing helped draft charges against employee — Irregularity rendering dismissal procedurally unfair.
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Bias — Chairperson taking over role as initiator and cross-examining accused employee vigorously and at length in initiator’s absence — Dismissal procedurally unfair.
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Charges — Employer not confined to instituting disciplinary action only in respect of offences listed in disciplinary code.
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Supervisor failing to ensure banking of cash and turning blind eye to theft by subordinates — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, at the time supervisor of the respondent’s debtor’s department, was charged inter alia with gross negligence, incompetence and fraud after it was established that large amounts of cash received from sales had not been banked. She was found guilty and dismissed. The applicant contended that her dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair, but declined to lead evidence in rebuttal of the respondent’s case.

Before dealing with the merits, the arbitrator noted that the respondent’s representative had complained in closing argument of his earlier decision to allow the applicant to be represented by a legal practitioner. To do so at that late stage, when his earlier objections had been overruled, was contemptuous and fallacious. The respondent’s representative’s complaint was that the presence of a legal practitioner had protracted proceedings. However, the respondent had called on six witnesses, whom the applicant had a right to cross-examine. 

On the merits, the arbitrator noted that the fact that the employee had not led evidence did not affect the onus; it merely meant that whether the dismissal was unfair had to be determined on the employer’s evidence alone. 

The arbitrator rejected the applicant’s argument that the charges were invalid because they were not expressly covered by the employer’s disciplinary code; all that is required of an employer is to have a rational basis for instituting disciplinary action. The applicant was in possession of the respondent’s financial policy manuals. These provided that cash should be banked daily. Whether she had read the manuals was immaterial; it was part of her job to ensure that banking was done regularly and timeously. The applicant had not only breached that rule, but had also permitted “cash rolling”, approved unauthorised loans to staff and turned a blind eye to theft. That she had not benefited personally from  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 198
any of these actions was also immaterial. There was no basis for interfering with the sanction of dismissal.

Turning to the procedure followed by the respondent, the arbitrator noted that at a point in the hearing the initiator had left the room and the presiding officer had cross-examined the applicant vigorously and at length. Furthermore, the applicant’s appeal was presided over by an employee who had assisted in the drafting of the charges. This constituted a further gross irregularity. 

The applicant was awarded compensation equivalent to a month’s salary.

____________________________________________________________________________________
Award

Details of the hearing and representation
This arbitration hearing was held at CDR-MEIBC offices in Johannesburg. Mr JCM Roets of Roets & Du Plessis Attorneys represented the applicant. The respondent was represented by its director, Mr S Curtis. As is evident from the covering page of this award, this matter was heard over five days since October 2004. At the end of the proceedings on 25 July 2006, and in view of the protracted nature of these proceedings, the parties’ representatives had agreed to file their written heads of arguments.

Background to the dispute and the issue to be decided
The applicant was charged with (1) gross negligence/gross incompetence, (2) breach of employees’ duty of good faith, (3) unauthorised removal of company goods or property, and (4) fraudulent transactions. Following upon a disciplinary enquiry held on 26 November 2003, the applicant was advised of her dismissal on 10 December 2003. She had then lodged an appeal on the same date, which appeal was heard and dismissed on 6 January 2004. The applicant through her attorney challenged both the procedural and substantive fairness of her dismissal. The issue to be determined is whether her dismissal was fair, and if not, whether she should be awarded compensation, it being the only relief she sought.

Summary of evidence
The applicant did not testify in these proceedings. Following upon a pre-arbitration conference, it was agreed that the following were common cause; the applicant was employed with effect from 1 November 1995 in the capacity of administrative supervisor in the respondent’s administration department. At the time of her dismissal, she earned a basic monthly salary equal to R7 550.
William Nsele, the group’s HR director, and who was the HR manager at the time gave a background of the events that led to charges being laid against the applicant. He testified that one of the respondent’s bookkeepers, Malie Bhana, was busy with accounts in November 2003 when she discovered that vast amounts of cash received from sales had not been banked over time. Bhana had then raised the matter with the debtors department and after having discussions with the applicant, had then  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 199
  brought the matter to the attention of Nsele to whom she handed over deposit slips. Nsele had then asked the respondent’s Coetzee of group loss control to investigate the matter. The applicant and other employees including Ramah Singh (whose name features predominately in the alleged shenanigans) were interviewed and subjected to a polygraph testing. The test could not reveal whether anyone was involved in theft, but Dreyer had pursued the matter and had asked Nsele to draft the charges against the applicant. In drafting the charges and based on what Dreyer had told him, Nsele took into account that the applicant was the responsible supervisor tasked with ensuring that money was deposited daily; that she had knowledge of who was taking money and had however not reported it to management; and was aware of the practice of cash rolling taking place in her department. Nsele further contended that the third charge should have read “allowed unauthorised removal of company goods or property”. He contended that it was not necessary that the charges be detailed. When the notice was issued to the applicant, it was issued together with other documents including her own statement, that of Singh, and copies of the respondent’s financial policies and procedures as contained at 31–36 of the respondent’s bundle. The disciplinary enquiry was followed by an appeal hearing, which Nsele presided over. He had confirmed the dismissal. Under cross-examination, Nsele contended that Bhana was doing reconciliations when she discovered that cash paid in for goods had not been deposited as required. She had not picked the practice of cash rolling. This issue came about after the applicant had informed Dreyer of it, and the fact that Singh had taken money.
Harry Coetzee, the respondent’s group security manager testified that he had received an anonymous call related to something untoward in the administration department. He had also received a phone call from Nsele who had requested his assistance. His investigations had revealed inter alia that a moneybag containing R30 000 mysteriously went missing. The moneybag was supposed to have been collected by Fidelity Guard for banking. Follow-ups were made with Fidelity Guard, but there were no indications that the bag had been handed over to it. Employees, including the applicant and Singh, were interviewed and statements were taken from them. The employees were then subjected to polygraph testing to establish whether the missing money was stolen or not. After he spoke to the applicant, the latter had written a statement as contained at 11–12 of the respondent’s bundle. The applicant had told him that Singh was involved in borrowing money from the petty cash through cash rolling. Further statements were taken from Singh who had admitted to “borrowing” cash. Criminal charges were subsequently laid against Singh.
Coetzee under cross-examination testified that although he was not a commissioner of oaths, he had advised the applicant to write and sign her statement on her free will, and had warned her that it could be used at her disciplinary enquiry. Coetzee further contended that the statement was not signed before a commissioner of oaths, as there was no possibility of criminal charges being laid against the applicant. He further denied that if the applicant had not revealed what she knew about Singh, the respondent would not have known what was going on. He contended that  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 200
  investigations were ongoing and that the missing amounts could have been picked up when reconciliations were fully done. He contended that the applicant knew that she had to talk at some stage, and further that she had ample opportunity to do so prior to these investigations.
Salome Dreyer, the respondent’s credit manager, and to whom the applicant reported, testified that she had drafted the charges against the applicant with the assistance of Nsele, and had acted as complainant in the internal disciplinary enquiry. With regard to the first charge of “gross negligence/gross incompetence”, Dreyer had testified that this followed upon the applicant’s failure to perform her duties as supervisor in that she had lent out money to staff in her department; had known that staff took money from cash sales box without authorisation, but had not informed management. She testified that the applicant had used money from the cash sales box to borrow it to staff instead of banking it, and that such conduct was in contravention of the respondent’s cash policies and procedures. Dreyer testified that this practice had gone on for months, notwithstanding the respondent’s specific policies that all funds received must be deposited intact on a daily basis.
With regard to the charge of “breach of employees’ duty of good faith to the company”, Dreyer testified that this charge was brought about due to the reason that the applicant was aware that staff was taking money, and further that she herself was giving out loans out of the cash sales box and had not informed her of this practice. The charge of “unauthorised removal of company goods or property” was according to Dreyer, removed from the charge sheet as it was discovered that the applicant had only given staff company money without authorisation. It was found that there was no basis for charging her with theft of money notwithstanding the fact that a bag of money was discovered to have been stolen or missing.
With regard to the charge of “fraudulent transactions”, it was alleged that the applicant had rolled cash. This practice involved the taking of money from clients for goods sold, not banking the cash against sales as required, and using it to clear old debts and matching invoices arising from unauthorised borrowing from the cash sales box. Dreyer further contended that the applicant had been employed in the same department for eight years and she was aware of the company’s financial policies and procedures as she had personally given her a copy, and further that these were attached to her letter of appointment. Dreyer further testified that the effect of the practice of cash rolling was that books could not be reconciled, and that interest was lost since cash was held back instead of being banked. She contended that the applicant deserved to be dismissed.
Under cross-examination, Dreyer confirmed that all employees knew that it was against company policies to roll cash, and that these actions constituted an offence. She conceded that two employees, viz, Kathy and Karen were lent money by the applicant but were not disciplined. She contended that the practice of rolling cash had been ongoing for between one and one and a half years, and that this practice became clearer when one Singh was moved to that department. Investigation had  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 201
  however revealed that prior to Singh coming to the department, the practice had been ongoing albeit on a small scale. She further testified that her immediate superior, Wienand was disciplined and issued with a final written warning for the actions of the applicant, but that she was not disciplined. She contended that as a result of this practice, an estimated R110 000 was found to be missing. Of this amount, R60 000 was verified when reconciliation were done. She conceded that the applicant had previously been warned about not keeping her records reconciled and balancing her books, and that she was to keep an eye on her. She however asserted that she could not pick up the problem as cash was being rolled over. The problem with Ramah Singh only surfaced in November 2003 after a bag of money was found missing, and after all the employees in the department were subjected to a polygraph test. The applicant had subsequently approached her and confessed that Singh had been involved in taking money. Singh had subsequently signed an acknowledgement of debt in respect of R32 000. Dreyer conceded that the applicant had made her aware of the problem, but contended that it was only after some four months that Singh had been taking money. She further conceded that the charge of “gross incompetence” was misplaced, as the applicant never complained of being unable to perform her functions.
The respondent’s current financial director, Graham Katzenellenbogen, was its internal auditor at the time. He testified that he had investigated the issue of cash rolling after it was discovered that the admin department’s accounts were not in order. He was tasked with investigating the matter with a view of putting systems in place and preventing or minimising similar occurrences. His findings as contained at 122 of the respondent’s bundle had revealed that the respondent’s banking policies and procedures had not been complied with; that regular reconciliation had not been done; that receipts were not accompanied by order forms; that orders were invoiced without deposits being accounted for; that there was about R1.4 million outstanding in that old payments had not been recorded; that there were no entries made against invoices; that orders not paid for had been released without authorisation by the financial director; that there was mismatching of deposits with payment invoices as a result of which R110 000 was unaccounted for; cash from orders received from clients had not been banked at all or on time; unauthorised staff loans; cash rolling in that cash sales were rolled over to the next sales, ie that money collected from one customer was allocated to the invoice of another customer; and that interests on cash not banked was lost.
Katzenellenbogen further testified that the applicant was experienced and should have known what was required of her in terms of the respondent’s policies and procedures. He further testified that loans to staff were not to be given from cash sales, and that all staff members knew that they could get loans from petty cash if authorised by the financial manager. Under cross-examination, he further testified that there were many fictitious transactions in relation to the unaccounted amount of R110 000. He further conceded that other than the applicant, higher management should have ensured that all staff members complied with the respondent’s policies and procedures, and that the bookkeeper should have picked up  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 202
  discrepancies. He conceded that Dreyer should also have been disciplined, and that the risks could have been minimised through follow up meetings with the applicant. In respect of his finding that cash sale receipts were not credited to the cash sale accounts promptly and the fact that cash sale accounts were not being reconciled and cleared effectively, he conceded that both the applicant and Singh were responsible in this regard, and that Dreyer and other senior management people were supposed to have monitored the applicant and Singh. He conceded that the debtors’ manager, Wienand had ultimate responsibility, and further that the R110 000 that went missing could have been as a result of a combination of cash rolling and theft.
David Wienand, the respondent’s current credit controller responsible for cash sales was the senior credit manager at the time. He testified that prior to the dismissal of the applicant, meetings were held with her on 20 January 2003 and on 7 March 2003 in order to discuss the performance of her section, and its failure to keep reconciliation up to date. Following the second meeting, it was decided that Singh should be brought in to assist the applicant as she was under pressure. He confirmed that he was issued with a final written warning for the incidents after being charged with gross incompetence.
Under cross-examination, Wienand contended that he only became aware that the applicant was lending money to other employees just before her disciplinary hearing. He conceded that Dreyer should have been disciplined, as she should have been aware of the missing amounts. He further contended that in respect of the warning issued to him, he had acknowledged the charge, as he should have been more aware of what was going on in the department. He denied that he had allowed the applicant to lend money to other employees out of the cash sales. When it was put to him that one of the directors, David Blogg was allowed to roll cash as he used to change cheques for cash sales, his response was that he was authorised to do so by the financial director, and that there was a reciprocal exchange in this instance. With regard to meetings held with the applicant, Wienand conceded that the applicant was not warned or trained notwithstanding the fact that the problems with reconciliation kept cropping up, and it was not proper not to have followed up meetings after the last one. He however contended that it was assumed that she would improve. He further conceded that the applicant should have been warned instead of being dismissed. He testified that the offence of cash rolling was not contained in the disciplinary code, and that the applicant was not told not to engage in such practices. He however contended that it was well known by staff that it should not be practiced.
The testimony of the chairperson of the internal enquiry, Peter Loggernberg, was heard over two days. I will summarise it as follows: He is currently the senior manager (handling department), and has been with the company for 23 years. He testified that when he commenced with the enquiry, he had advised the applicant of her rights. The applicant had however refused or failed to put questions to witnesses. Loggernberg testified that he had in fact asked the applicant lots of questions to ensure that she  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 203
  understood all the facts. He had established that the applicant had failed to adhere to policies and procedures, that she was responsible for supervising Singh, that she did not have authority to lend money to other employees, and further that she had not kept a record of loans made to other employees. He further testified that the two witnesses that the applicant had brought had confirmed that they had borrowed money with her consent. Prior to taking a decision to dismiss her, Loggernberg had looked at her record, years of service, and the fact that aggravating circumstances outweighed her mitigating factors. Furthermore, he had considered the fact that the applicant was still young and could still be gainfully employed. He had found no substance in her allegations that she had been inconsistently treated in that other people in similar circumstances were dismissed. He had further found her guilty on all four charges.
Under extensive cross-examination, Loggernberg conceded that he had prior knowledge of the facts of the matter prior to the enquiry since he was furnished with a file containing statements from the applicant, and Singh, invoices, records, and deposit slips. He testified that Wienand was called as a witness, and that Dreyer was the complainant. He contended that the applicant was afforded an opportunity to pose questions to Dreyer, and when she failed to do so, he had excused Dreyer after he had posed questions to her. When asked what mitigating circumstances were submitted by the applicant prior to a finding being made, it became apparent that Loggernberg did not know what the concept of mitigation implied. He refused to comment when it was put to him that he had acted as presiding officer and prosecutor. When asked again whether any witnesses had testified, his response was that none had done so. He conceded that by not calling Wienand or allowing the applicant to pose questions to her was unfair, and that he had relied on statements made by him without them being tested. He could not comment when it was put to him that the sanction was not consistent as only the applicant was dismissed. In re-examination, he pointed out that he had known the applicant for a long time and he did not need to canvass her mitigating circumstances with her, that Dreyer had acted as initiator and witness and that the applicant did not challenge her evidence. He conceded that Dreyer left the proceedings now and then to attend to other matters.

Summary of arguments
After the respondent had closed its case, Mr Roets for the applicant had indicated that he would not be calling any witnesses, including the applicant. He had then closed his case and as already indicated above, the parties had agreed to file their written heads of argument. Mr Curtis for the respondent had filed 22 pages of his written heads of argument (inclusive of a reply) and Mr Roets’ written heads of argument came to 59 pages. I will only deal with salient points raised in these written arguments.
Mr Curtis’ starting point was to raise the issue of legal representation, which was argued and dealt with at the commencement of these proceedings. To the extent that I had allowed the applicant to be legally represented, Curtis attacked my ruling in that regard as “illegitimate” and  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 204
  “ill-founded”. He had further contended that my ruling in favour of legal representation had resulted in unnecessary, time-consuming, and elaborate inappropriate cross-examination of the respondent’s witnesses.
With regard to procedural fairness, Curtis complained that Roets had conducted the applicant’s case by application of the rules of evidence as required in a criminal court without any application or understanding of the fair principles of fair procedures as required by the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the LRA”). He contended that the requirements of fairness were fully detailed in the Code of Good Practice as contained in Schedule 8 of the LRA. In this regard, he submitted that an investigation into the matter was conducted as required by item 4(1) of the Schedule, and that the applicant was involved in these investigations. Curtis further submitted that there was no need of a formal enquiry into the allegations against the applicant, and that the applicant was notified of the allegations against her even though this was not necessary given the fact that she had been involved in the investigations. It was further submitted that the applicant was allowed the opportunity to state her case in response to the allegations; that she had not contested Dreyer’s version; and further that she was given a reasonable time within which to prepare for the hearing. It was further contended that following the enquiry, she was advised of its outcome in writing, and that in the circumstances, the respondent had complied with the requirements of fair procedures in terms of Schedule 8. Having made reference to Halton Cheadle’s comments in the SEIFSA news of March 2006 to the effect that the Code did not require a formal enquiry, Curtis again continued to attack my ruling on legal representation, and lamented that had this been disallowed, the matter could have been finalised in a day.
With regard to the substantive fairness of the dismissal, Curtis submitted that section (item)(7) [sic] of the Code provides guidelines in cases of dismissal for misconduct. In this regard, he contended that the applicant was well aware of the standards and procedures used by the company having worked in the position for eight years, and further since copies in that regard were issued to her. It was submitted that she was aware of the rule that cash money received should be banked the next day at the latest, and that her contention that she was not aware of the rules was ridiculous. It was further submitted that the applicant was aware that her subordinates were not allowed to take money from the company for their own use, and it was not necessary to have a written rule in this regard. It was further argued that the applicant had failed to adequately guard the assets of the company under her protection and that she had allowed company money to be taken by Singh over a long period for her own use and without authority. This, it was argued, constituted gross negligence on her part and further, breach of her duty of good faith to the company in that she did not report that money had been taken when she had full knowledge. It was further submitted that the reconciliation of the cashbook was under her direct control and that she was aware that Singh was taking money from the company. In this regard, it was argued that she must have been aware that fraudulent transactions had been undertaken and that cash had been rolled up in order to cover up this misconduct. The rule that money was to be 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 205
  banked timeously was argued to be both valid and reasonable; that the applicant was well aware of it as it was consistently applied; and that she had breached this rule. Curtis disputed the contention that the applicant was a scapegoat as “abject nonsense” in that none of the persons blamed by the applicant who were not subjected to a disciplinary enquiry were aware that the applicant was allowing Singh to help herself to company money. It was argued that as none of them were aware, they could not be guilty of a breach of good faith to the company. With regard to the appropriate sanction, it was contended that the applicant had, at the internal disciplinary hearing and through her statements, admitted that she had for many years loaned company money to employees without authority and without any record of transactions, was aware that Singh was taking money without keeping a record, and that she had a responsibility to prevent such actions. To this end, it was argued that she was grossly negligent, was guilty of breach of good faith, was guilty of fraudulent transactions, and further that gross negligence and fraud on their own necessitated a dismissal even if for a first offence.
Having summarised the evidence as led by the respondent’s witnesses, Roets in his written closing heads of argument submitted that the respondent had failed to prove that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally and substantively fair hence there was no reason for the applicant to adduce any evidence. He contended that arbitrations conducted by the CCMA and the bargaining councils constitute fresh hearings, and that arbitrators must hear all the evidence relating to the issue, and decide the issue afresh whether the employee committed the misconduct for which he was dismissed or not. Having made reference to John Grogan, Dismissal at 90–93, Roets contended that if the answer is in the negative, it must be found that the dismissal was substantively unfair even though the employer acted reasonably on the basis of information available before it at the time of the dismissal. 
With regard to procedural fairness, Roets submitted that section 188(1)(b) of the LRA required that a dismissal for misconduct must be effected in accordance with a fair procedure. He contended that the respondent failed to prove the existence of any disciplinary code and procedure. In the absence thereof, the Code of Good Practice had to be relied upon. He conceded that investigations were conducted to determine whether there were grounds for dismissal, but however contended that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally unfair on the following grounds: that she was not properly notified of the allegations against her; that she was not supplied with particulars of the charges; that the enquiry was not conducted in the applicant’s home language, which is Afrikaans; that no enquiry was conducted to determine whether she understood the charges; that she was not afforded an opportunity to state her case in response; was extensively cross-examined by the presiding officer; that she was not afforded a reasonable time to prepare a response; was not provided with all documentation used against her in the hearing; that no evidence was produced at the hearing other than statements read to her; that she was not given written reasons for her dismissal, and was not advised of her rights to refer the matter to the Council. 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 206
With regard to substantive fairness of the dismissal, Roets further made reference to the guidelines set out in item 7 of the Code of Good Practice. In the first instance, he argued that no evidence was led to indicate that a disciplinary code existed and whether any rule was broken. With regard to the charges leveled against the applicant, Roets argued that only one of them (that all funds must be banked daily) was codified in the respondent’s procedures and policies. He however contended that no sanction was prescribed for this misconduct, and that both Katzenellenbogen and Dreyer had testified that this rule was not strictly complied with or enforced. It was further argued that none of the offences alleged against the applicant were contained in any written code or rules of conduct or policies and procedures. Having made reference to Louw v Delta Motor Corporation (1996) 17 ILJ 958 (IC),1 Roets contended that a failure to report dishonest conduct was not, or had not been made a dismissible offence in terms of the employer’s disciplinary code, and that no evidence was led to this effect in this regard. He contended that this particular rule was not documented anywhere. Furthermore, Roets argued that the respondent failed to prove that the rule existed or that the applicant contravened any rule.
With regard to the charge of gross incompetence/gross negligence (failing to deposit funds daily), it was submitted that no evidence was led other than reference being made at 18–19. He contended that even if it was accepted that the applicant failed to do the banking daily and intact, the evidence of other witnesses was that the rule was not strictly complied with. In respect of the charge of “breach of duty of good faith” by not reporting cash rolling by Singh, Roets contended that other than a “confession” by the applicant to Dreyer and her written statements at 11–12, no other evidence was led. He contended that the statement was not proven. With regard to the third charge of “unauthorised removal of company property or goods” (borrowing money for private use and lending money to staff members out of the cash sales box), it was again argued that such conduct cannot be seen as unauthorised removal of company goods or property, and that the applicant did not remove money from premises. The fourth charge of fraudulent transactions ie cash rolling, was also argued not to have been proven.
With regard to the validity and reasonableness of the rules in place, it was argued that the mere fact that lending of money to staff, cash rolling, fraudulent transaction, breach of duty of good faith, unauthorised removal of goods, failing to bank funds was in the past not strictly applied by the respondent shows that the employer did not consider the rules reasonable, and further since these rules were not included in the disciplinary code. It was further argued that the applicant could not reasonably have known that her actions were unacceptable, that she could not have known that the transgression of these rules could lead to her dismissal, and that the rules were not contained in a disciplinary code. With regard to consistent application of the rule, it was argued that the rules had been inconsistently  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 207
  applied when regard is had to the similar conduct by some of the respondent’s employees, viz, Magda Coetzer, Kathy, Karin, Dave Wienand, and Dreyer. With regard to the sanction of dismissal, it was argued that it was not reasonable, and as conceded by Wienand, that the applicant should have been warned and further that her mitigating circumstances were not taken into account.

Analysis of evidence and arguments

The issue of legal representation
At the commencement of these proceedings, Mr Curtis had objected to the applicant being legally represented. His main argument was that the dispute concerned a dismissal for ordinary misconduct, and that the issues were not of a complex nature as to require legal representation. Mr Roets for the applicant had indicated that the issues were not as simple as contended by Curtis, and that the applicant could not be expected to properly ventilate them and would be prejudiced if she was denied such representation. 
Having considered the nature of the charges that led to the dismissal of the applicant, the voluminous bundle (140 pages) submitted by the respondent, and the fact that the comparative abilities of the parties were such that the applicant would be disadvantaged on her own, I had ruled in favour of legal representation. Commissioners have powers to make such rulings by virtue of rule 16(2) of the MEIBC Rules read together with section 138 of the LRA. The fact that a party opposes legal representation does not imply that an application in that regard should willy nilly be denied. Valid arguments and not mere statements must substantiate any such objection. If it is deemed to be in the interests of justice and fairness that legal representation should be allowed, and further having taken the provisions of the MEIBC Rules and section 138 of the LRA into account, then an appropriate ruling should be made in that regard. Any protestations, tantrums and sulking in this regard will be properly placed on record, and the aggrieved party, more specifically of the experience of Mr Curtis should know or is expected to know what his rights are in that regard. Curtis in his written submissions downplayed his experience and expertise in matters of labour law and he is well aware that this was disingenuous on his part. He is the director of the respondent and well familiar with processes before the Council as he appears here frequently. For him to contend ex post facto, that the basis on which I allowed legal representation was “illegitimate” and “ill-founded” is not only fallacious and vitriolic, but also contemptuous. A ruling to allow legal representation was made at the arbitration proceedings in his presence, and for him to make such shocking remarks in his written heads of argument when the matter had been laid to rest is nothing but opportunistic.
Curtis had further continued to lament about my ruling even in his response to Roets’ written heads of argument. He had gone on about how as a consequence of my ruling proceedings were prolonged. Inasmuch as it is true that the cross-examination of the respondent’s witnesses went  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 208
  overboard and was wearisome at times, it cannot be taken away from that cross-examination that it yielded concessions from the respondent’s witnesses, which it is doubted that the applicant could have achieved on her own. Curtis, it would appear to me, was frustrated by the fact that Roets continuously and appropriately objected to his line and manner of questioning his witnesses. He conveniently fails to mention that he had at some stage during these proceedings requested an adjournment out of frustration in order to request a mandate from his fellow directors to withdraw as representative and to seek legal representation on behalf of the respondent. Fortunately, common sense had prevailed and he had no choice but to proceed with the matter. The fact that the proceedings were protracted cannot solely be blamed on Roets. Curtis had called upon six witnesses to testify on behalf of the respondent, and I had given him latitude to conduct his case without hindrance. I fail to understand how in these circumstances he could reasonably have expected the proceedings to be completed in one day unless he mistook this bargaining council for a kangaroo court of some sort. To this end, Curtis’ comments with regard to my ruling pertaining to legal representation and the net effect thereof are devoid of any truth and logic.

Onus
It is now trite that section 192(2) of the LRA put this debate to rest by casting the onus of proving that there was a dismissal on the employee, and the onus of proving that the dismissal was fair on the employer. It is further trite that the standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities. Eleven years after the advent of the LRA, it is expected of commissioners and parties to be well familiar with these basic principles relating to onus. Any harping on the incorrect standard of proof applied by so-called “inexperienced commissioners” in my view is a general and unwarranted affront on all commissioners’ intelligence, which cannot in my view be left unchallenged. Academics, legal representatives and parties in general are at liberty to disagree with commissioners’ approaches to matters without necessarily having to insult or labelling them.
That a dismissal of an employee is unfair if the employer fails to prove on a balance of probabilities that the reason for the dismissal was for a fair reason related to the employee’s conduct or capacity as contemplated in section 188(1)(a)(i) of the LRA, is a principle that is well established and which arbitrators and courts are fully aware of. (See Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd (Rustenburg Section) v CCMA [2006] SCA 115 (RSA)).2 The standard of proof in simple terms implies that the version by the party who bears the onus (the employer) must be more probable than the version of the other party (the employee). In the absence of a rebuttal by way of evidence by the employee as in this case, the issue to be determined is whether it can be established from the employer’s case alone, that the dismissal was unfair. 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 209

Substantive fairness
Item 7 of the Code of Good Conduct: Dismissal is of assistance in providing guidelines in determining whether a dismissal for misconduct was unfair. As the parties’ representatives had confined themselves to these guidelines in their arguments, I will also address the issues raised within these confines.
Did the applicant contravene a rule or standard regulating conduct in, or of relevance, to the workplace?
Roets’ starting point was that since the disciplinary code did not exist, it could not be said that there was any rule that was contravened by the applicant. This aspect of Roets’ argument is dealt at length under the heading of procedural fairness below. Suffice to say for now that I had found that there is no merit in the argument that the respondent did not have a disciplinary code and procedure in place. It is also relevant to mention that even in the absence of a formal disciplinary code and procedure there is nothing that prevents an employer from charging an employee with misconduct if there is a basis for bringing such a charge. A disciplinary code is a mere guideline indicating what are unacceptable forms of behaviour and the applicable sanction in every instance. A code will ordinarily not be exhaustive in terms of a list of prohibited forms of conduct. There are certain basic common law principles that employees are expected to adhere to without being reminded by a code. I still have to come across a disciplinary code that specifically states that “an employee shall not kill a fellow employee at the workplace”. Such conduct if it unfortunately takes place, will be categorised under the general concept of “violent conduct” or “anti social behaviour” etc. However it is expected of civilised human beings to know that they are not supposed to kill each other anywhere and for any reason. Conversely, it is expected of civilised and sophisticated employees to know what forms of conduct are or are not acceptable within the workplace.
The respondent’s disciplinary code and procedure for instance, does not specifically prohibit “cash rolling”. Does this imply that the respondent must close its eyes to such conduct if it comes to its attention simply on the basis that such an offence is not specified in the code? Anyone who believes and wants to persuade others to believe that an employer should not act against perpetrators in these circumstances is living in their own little world of fantasy. It would not only be insane, but devoid of any logic and economic rationale to allow such a situation to happen. Businesses would not survive and joblessness would be catastrophic. There is nothing in law or logic that prevents an employer from disciplining an employee for acts of misconduct that are not codified, or for which a disciplinary sanction is not specified. All that is required is for the employer to furnish a rational basis for instituting discipline against an employee, and to show that the rule allegedly infringed was reasonable and not capricious. (See Atlantis Diesel Engines (Pty) Ltd v Roux NO & another (1988) 9 ILJ 45 (C)). To this end, there is no merit in Roets’ contention that the respondent had no basis for laying the four charges against the applicant. This moreso in view of the fact that the conduct complained of  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 210
  was alleged to have been a contravention of the respondent’s financial policies and procedures. The decision in Louw v Delta Corporation, supra, relied upon by Roets for the proposition that the dismissal of an employee was unfair on the grounds that the dishonest conduct in question (failure to report dishonest conduct by another employee) was not a dismissible offence in terms of the employer’s disciplinary code, is out of touch with reality and has no relevance or place in our modern labour law. This is more particularly so when one has regards to the provisions of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000, and attempts at curbing untoward behaviour within the workplace through the encouragement of whistle-blowing.
Was a rule or standard contravened?
Roets had contended that the respondent had failed to prove that the applicant contravened any rule or standard. With regard to the first charge of “gross incompetence/gross negligence” which related to the failure to deposit funds daily, he had contended that no evidence was led in this regard other than reliance at 18–19 of the respondent’s bundle. Roets’ submissions in this regards are misleading. Firstly, the evidence of Dreyer, Wienand and more specifically that of Katzenellenbogen intended and succeeded in showing how firstly, the responsibilities of ensuring daily banking were conferred to the applicant, and who was further tasked with ensuring a proper reconciliation of accounts. Ketzenellenbogen’s report as contained at 122 of the respondent’s bundle indicated that cash sales proceeds were not banked promptly. Pages 18–19 contained figures in terms of non-banking of proceeds from July 2003. Roets merely attacked the source of these documents rather than its contents. He was more concerned about where these documents came from and how they were discovered without addressing the contents thereof. Katzenellenbogen was prepared to concede that other people were equally responsible, more specifically Dreyer and Wienand, and further that the bookkeepers should have discovered that cash was not being banked promptly as required. The respondent’s contention however was that the primary responsibility was that of the applicant as the first senior employee in line and that she should have ensured that daily banking took place.
The respondent’s policies and procedures manuals as contained at 31–36 were issued as far back as April 2002. Wienand and Dreyer had testified that they had both ensured that the applicant was in possession of these manuals. This piece of evidence was meekly challenged, and in the absence of the applicant’s version in that regard, there is no reason why it should not stand. Whether the applicant read the manuals or not is neither here nor there in view of the fact that given her position at the time, it could not have been expected of her managers to monitor her to ensure that she read the manuals. The manual contained on page 32 specifically mentions that “all funds must be deposited intact daily”. The manual contained at 34, with regard to “receipts and daily banking”, cites the applicant in her capacity as supervisor to be the person tasked with the responsibility and accountability of this function and Dreyer as the responsible official. I did not understand the applicant’s case to be that she 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 211
  was not responsible for this function. All she did through Roets was to point fingers at other people in an attempt to extricate herself from her responsibilities. It needs to be stressed that a work environment depends on a collective effort for its survival, from mundane functions performed by an employee tasked with ensuring that ablution facilities are in a healthy state to its directors who provide the vision required for the enterprise to achieve its objectives. The collective implies that each and every employee is responsible for specific tasks they are employed to perform within the enterprise. The applicant in her capacity as supervisor was tasked by the enterprise with ensuring that its cash was banked intact daily. This was her primary function amongst others, and to the extent that banking was not done intact daily, it is found that she was indeed grossly negligent. The gross nature of such negligence is imputed from the long period over which it took time, and the rippling effects it had on the respondent.
The second charge of “breach of employee’s duty of good faith to the company” is in respect of the allegation that the applicant had failed to report that employees in her department were involved in cash rolling. Roets had again contended that the respondent had failed to provide any evidence to suggest that the applicant was aware of the cash rolling, and that the only available evidence was her alleged “confession” as contained at of the respondent’s bundle. Even then Roets attacked the statement on the basis that it was made in front of Coetzee, who was not a commissioner of oaths or justice of peace and that Coetzee did not commission the statement and further that he did not warn her of the consequences of making the statement. Roets had further contended that there was no evidence to suggest that the statement was made voluntarily.
Again, Roets’ submissions in this regard were misleading and intended to obfuscate the real evidence presented at these proceedings. Coetzee, Katzenellenbogen and Dreyer were adamant that even without the co-operation of the applicant (which was in any event belated) the practice of cash rolling would have come to the fore after Bhana had blown the whistle. The applicant had, according to undisputed evidence, only come clean after investigations were underway, and after she had been taken through a polygraph test. In my view, at the time that she approached Dreyer to reveal all, she suffered from fear of the unknown in that she did not know at the time what investigations had uncovered. Coetzee’s version that the applicant had been referred to her by Dreyer and had further volunteered to tell him “certain things” went unchallenged. His version further that he had asked the applicant to put everything in writing was undisputed, and there is nothing to suggest that the applicant was cajoled, threatened or intimidated into writing the statement. The applicant had typed her own statement, which both she and Coetzee had signed. Coetzee had further advised her that the statement could be used in a possible disciplinary enquiry, and had not commissioned it, as there was no possibility of criminal charges being laid against the applicant. In these circumstances, it is fallacious to suggest that the applicant’s statement was not made voluntarily. It would have been interesting to hear evidence with regard to how she was forced into writing the statement. The fact that the statement was  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 212
  not commissioned is irrelevant, and to the extent that it was relied upon in the disciplinary enquiry and referred to in these proceedings, due regard must be had to it.
In her statement, she conceded to lending money to staff from the cash sale box since 2002. She had done so without permission. She had further conceded to “keeping back the banking of the cash for a few days until all the money was paid back”, and had also conceded that she was well aware from July 2003 that Ramah used to borrow money. For Roets to argue that the applicant, given her position of responsibility, was not obliged to report these shenanigans is shocking to say the least. Ramah was gleefully plundering the respondent’s money with the applicant’s full knowledge and assistance, and it is said that the applicant was supposed to look the other way and not report this. It is trite that one of the basic unwritten duties of employees, especially employees in senior positions, is to further the employer’s business interests and to refrain from misconduct generally. An employee’s wilful failure to report misdemeanours committed by other employees under his or her supervision constitutes a complete breach of faith, and thus destroys any form of trust between that employer and employee. To the extent that there is nothing to suggest that the applicant was not aware of Ramah’s plunder of the respondent’s cash from its cash sales box, and further to the extent that she countenanced and encouraged such plunder actively by not disclosing it, she was indeed guilty of the charge in question.
The charge of “unauthorised removal of company goods or property” is found to be unsustainable in view of it being common cause that the applicant was not alleged to have stolen any money from the cash box. Nsele’s contention that the intention was to have the charge read “allowed unauthorised removal of company property or goods” is unhelpful and notwithstanding the fact that the applicant had indeed allowed other employees to borrow money from the cash sales box, she cannot be found guilty of an offence which she was not initially charged with. To this end, there was no basis for Loggernberg to find her guilty on this charge.
The charge in respect of “fraudulent transactions” pertains to the allegation that the applicant had rolled cash by taking money from clients, not banking the cash against sales as required, and using it to clear old debts and matching invoices arising from unauthorised borrowing from the cash sales. The applicant had in her statement conceded that cash was rolled over in order to clear unauthorised debts. This on the face of it involved “cooking the books” to make it appear that everything was in order. This constituted misrepresentation on her part and thus fraud. Notwithstanding Dreyer’s concession that the applicant may not have been aware of the extent of plundering and cash rolling by Ramah, the mere fact that she allowed Ramah to borrow money from the cash box and participated in the cover up as described above implies that she was a willing participant to fraudulent activities and transactions. That she did not benefit personally out of these shenanigans is immaterial. She was thus guilty of the charge in question. 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 213
Was the rule valid and reasonable?
Roets had argued that the mere fact that the rule pertaining to lending of money to staff; cash rolling; fraudulent transactions; breach of good faith; failing to bank funds daily was not in the past strictly enforced by the respondent implied that the respondent did not consider the rules reasonable. In this regard, it was argued that instances involving Magda Coetzer (cash rolling/lending of money and theft), Dave Blogg (exchanging cheques for cash) Edwin Jordan (failure to bank daily); Kathy and Karin (borrowing money) and outstanding cash sales account of R1, 4 million, indicated that the respondent did not regard these rules as valid and reasonable. These arguments again reflect a failure on the part of the applicant to appreciate the consequences of her actions and an endeavour to divert attention from herself. Dave Blogg was or is one of the respondent’s directors, and had exchanged cheques for cash. There was a legitimate transaction from which its effects on the respondent remain unknown. If the respondent suffered any prejudice following from these transactions, that remains unknown as no evidence was led in that regard. The unaccounted R1, 4 million was according to Katzenellenbogen, due to a variety of reasons including cash rolling. The borrowing of money by other employees was appropriately dealt with as soon as it came to the attention of the respondent. The respondent could only deal with any such forms of misconduct that came to its attention, and the fact that it had not acted before does not imply that the rules in this regard was regarded as invalid or unreasonable. 
The employee’s knowledge of the rules or standard:
From the argument that the applicant could not reasonably have known that her actions were unacceptable, and that she could not have known that the transgression of these rules could lead to her dismissal, it can be inferred that the applicant was well aware of the rules in question. Furthermore, the argument falls flat in the face for the simple reason that as stated before, there are certain basic rules in the workplace which need not be codified, but which employees invariably know that they should adhere to. It is improbable that the applicant could not have known that her negligence to bank funds intact daily would lead to cash rolling in view of employees helping themselves to those funds. It does not require an Einstein to know that cash rolling, failing to bank funds daily as required and lending money that is not yours is wrong. A person in the position of the applicant should reasonably have foreseen that her conduct would lead her into trouble. She took her chances and became very generous with the respondent’s funds when she was fully aware of the consequences of her actions. She could thus not complain once she found herself in the frying pan.
Consistent application of the rule:
It was argued that the respondent, taking into account the manner with which the other employees mentioned were not disciplined, inconsistently applied the rules. Wienand was issued with a final written warning for incompetence after investigations had revealed what was going on in his department. Dreyer as the applicant’s immediate superior went scot-free.  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 214

  Karin and Kathy were not disciplined for borrowing money out of the cash sales box. However, it was not disputed that they had borrowed the money with the full cooperation and consent of the applicant. Coetzer and Loggernberg had testified that other employees implicated in similar misconduct were disciplined accordingly. Coetzer had conceded that maybe the sanction of dismissal imposed on the applicant was harsh. The applicant, through Roets, had consistently portrayed herself as the sacrificial lamb. However, the facts are that she was employed as a supervisor in the department and the plundering of the respondent’s funds had taken place right under her nose, with her express approval and she had looked the other way instead of putting an end to it. Consistency or the parity principle is a relative term that must be applied as objectively as permissible. The pronouncement made in Truworths v Ramabulana NO & others [1999] 12 BLLR 1369 (LC) is apposite to the facts of this case considering the applicant’s view that Dreyer in particular was left unscathed. Yes, Dreyer was equally guilty of incompetence or negligence in that employees under her direct control and supervision were helping themselves to the proceeds of the company. It is odd that Wienand was also singled out for discipline while Dreyer escaped a similar fate. However, the focus is on the applicant who was found guilty of three out of the four charges, which were all serious in their nature. To this end, whilst the letting off of Dreyer cannot be condoned, the failure to discipline or dismiss her together with Wienand cannot make the dismissal of the applicant unfair. The applicant was a supervisor, and the respondent had entrusted her with its funds. As a person in the front line, the respondent depended on her to perform her duties diligently and to show loyalty to it. She had failed in that regard. It is her conduct that is in question and that needs to be viewed in isolation, not that of Dreyer and others. The non-discipline or dismissal of her subordinates or superiors cannot make her dismissal unfair when the seriousness of her conduct given her position is taken into account.
) Was dismissal an appropriate sanction?
The general principle in this regard is that the sanction must be appropriate for the contravention of the rule or standard. Roets’ contentions were that the sanction of dismissal in this case was unreasonable; that Wienand had conceded that the applicant should have been warned; that the respondent had failed to take the applicant’s mitigating circumstances into account and had only concentrated on the seriousness of the offence.
It is generally accepted that the employer in dealing with discipline, must take a cautious approach towards its employees, which includes applying progressive discipline in order to correct untoward behaviour. It is further generally accepted that the penalty must fit the offence, and that the employer is entitled to set the standards of conduct for its employees and to decide how these standards should be enforced. (See generally Nampak Corrugated Wadeville v Khoza (1999) 20 ILJ 578 (LAC);3 County Fair Foods (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & others (1999) 29 ILJ 1701 (LAC)).4 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 215
The Honourable Cameron JA in Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd (Rustenburg Section), supra, has once and for all laid to rest the debate surrounding the powers of commissioners insofar as interfering with the sanction imposed by the employer is concerned. At paragraph 40 of the judgment, the learned Judge had the following to say following his approval of the decision of Ngcobo JA in Nampak Corrugated, supra: 

“. . . a CCMA Commissioner is not vested with a discretion to impose a sanction in the case of workplace incapacity or misconduct. That discretion belongs in the first instance to the employer. The commissioner enjoys no discretion in relation to the sanction, but bears the duty of determining whether the employer’s sanction is fair”. 
  Thus the question to be asked as posed by Ngcobo JA, is whether the sanction is reasonable. Cameron JA had further made reference to Ngcobo JA’s views in County Fair and affirmed that commissioners must exercise greater caution when intervening, and to show a measure of deference to the employers sanction so long as it is fair. The issue to be determined is thus whether having considered the circumstances of this case as outlined above, the sanction of dismissal imposed on the applicant was fair.
For a moment, one would ignore the fact that the procedure in dismissing the applicant as outlined below was flawed. Looking at the facts of the matter, the charges laid against the applicant, and the fact that I had found that she was guilty on three out of the four charges; I am loath to interfering with the sanction of dismissal. Firstly, the applicant was guilty of three serious charges, that she could ordinarily have been dismissed on any one of them. Secondly, the applicant had not testified in these proceedings to protest her innocence, and implicating evidence against her went unchallenged. It would appear that in her wisdom, she adopted a beyond reproach attitude after hearing the respondent’s case and convinced herself that she had nothing to answer to as she mistakenly believed that the respondent had not discharged the onus of proving that she was indeed dismissed for a fair reason. Thirdly, given the applicant’s attitude of blaming everyone but herself, and her failure to acknowledge her shortcomings and the consequences of her actions, there is no justification or basis on which the sanction can be interfered with. She failed to appreciate the fact that she was in the wrong and made lame attempts through Roets to justify her actions. To the extent that her actions were such that the employer could not reasonably have been expected to sustain a trust working relationship with her, and further to the extent that she refused to the end to acknowledge any wrongdoing on her part, there is no basis on which it can be found that her dismissal was unfair.

Procedural Fairness of the dismissal
The first complaint in this regard was that the respondent had failed to prove the existence of a disciplinary code and procedure. Roets had taken issue with a copy of the respondent’s disciplinary & grievance procedure produced by Curtis. This copy is dated as effective from 1 January 2003. The applicant was dismissed on 9 December 2003, and I fail to understand how the existence of this document could be an issue. The dispute surrounding the existence of this document is further perplexing in view  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 216
  of the fact that Loggernberg was examined at length about it and whether he had adhered to its precepts. To this end, there is no substance in the contention that the respondent did not have a disciplinary code and procedure in place.
Another procedural issue complained of was that the applicant was not properly notified of the allegations against her and was thus not able to prepare a case in response (defence). It was further contended that no enquiry was conducted whether she understood the charges. Dreyer drafted the charges against the applicant with the assistance of Nsele. Dreyer had further testified that when the charges were drafted, “meetings and discussions were held with everyone including Loggernberg”. “Everybody knew what the charges were,” she said. It is now trite that a notice to attend a disciplinary enquiry must clearly specify charges that the employee is expected to face or answer. However, it is further trite that it does not imply that the charges need to be drawn up with the precision of an indictment in criminal courts. What is sufficient is that the employee should be in a position to put up a defence. In this case, the applicant had been aware of the allegations not only against her but also against other people in her entire department. She had been part of investigations and had made written statements. Given these surrounding circumstances, it would have been expected of the applicant to have been aware of what the charges against her were when she was issued with a notification. Loggernberg had not, as was his evidence, asked the applicant whether she knew or understood what the charges against her were. The consequences of this omission are however unknown in the absence of the applicant’s evidence. We do not know what prejudice she suffered as a consequence of this omission on the part of the chairperson, and it cannot be assumed that she was prejudiced, given her knowledge of the background of the charges. It was further not in dispute that Dreyer had read her statement with regard to the charges, and we will never know whether even thereafter, the applicant still did not know or understand what the charges against her were. Dreyer and Loggernberg had further testified that the applicant had not posed any questions after Dreyer had read her statement. This vital evidence went unchallenged other than to contend that she was not afforded an opportunity to state her case. Furthermore, the contention that the applicant is Afrikaans speaking, and that she had not understood proceedings as they were conducted in English is without substantiation, and in the absence of her evidence to show how she was prejudiced by the language used in the hearing, we cannot speculate on that matter. To this end, it is found that there is no substance in the argument that the applicant was not properly notified of the allegations against her. If this was the case and given her seniority within the company, it is expected that she would have raised her concerns at the enquiry. The fact that there is no indication that she did implies that it was not an issue until Roets made it an issue.
It was further argued that the applicant was not afforded an opportunity to state her case in response and that after she was asked to enter a plea, she was extensively cross-examined by the presiding officer. Loggernberg had conceded that he had asked the applicant “lots of questions”. Dreyer  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 217
  had conceded that she did not stay at all times during the hearing as she went in and out to attend to other matters. Dreyer’s conduct was odd given the seriousness of the charges against the applicant, and for Loggernberg to allow the situation was even more bizarre. The fact that the applicant had not posed any questions to Dreyer, after she had read her statement, did not mean that she had to leave the hearing. She was the initiator, and as is evident, it was left to Loggernberg to put questions to the applicant when he had no duty to do so. Roets’ contention that Loggernberg had acted as prosecutor and presiding officer is not far fetched. One only has to refer at 40–48, which mainly entails a question and answer session between Loggernberg and the applicant. This was not questioning with a view of clarifying matters. It was intense cross-examination that extended over eight typed pages. What is further of concern is that Dreyer had even testified that Loggernberg was party to the consultations when she drafted the charges. It is strange that Roets failed to pick up this gross irregularity amongst other things he nit-picked on. Nevertheless, to the extent that it is apparent that Loggernberg played a dual role in the internal enquiry, it is found that the hearing was procedurally flawed.
It was further argued that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally flawed in that she was not afforded a reasonable time to prepare a response in that she was also not provided with all the documents used against her in the hearing, and that no other evidence was produced at the hearing. Loggernberg’s contention in this regard was that he had asked the applicant when he commenced the proceedings whether she had enough time to prepare and she had answered in the affirmative. He further contended that she did not request any documents and that she was not furnished with any. She however asked for and was furnished with copies after she had requested a postponement. Pages 25–27 of the respondent’s bundle contain correspondence between the applicant and Nsele. At 25 is a letter dated 25 November 2003 in terms of which the applicant sought a postponement of the hearing from 24 November 2003 until 28 November 2003. The applicant had further requested that she be furnished with documents relevant to the charges laid against her in order to allow her time to review those documents and prepare herself for the hearing. Nsele had responded on 25 November and consented to the postponement as per page 27 of the bundle. He had also confirmed that documentation requested would be made available to her and was to be collected from him on that date. In the light of this correspondence, I fail to appreciate any merit in the contention that the applicant was not afforded sufficient time to prepare herself nor furnished with relevant documentation in preparation for the hearing.

[Editorial note: Paragraph numbering is as per original transcript.]
Only two witnesses were called upon to testify on behalf of the applicant at the internal disciplinary enquiry. Other than these two, as it appears from the minutes, no other witness testified with regard to allegations against the applicant. Dreyer had conceded that the statement she had read at the enquiry contained information passed on to her by Nsele, Jordaan and Wienand, and was thus hearsay. Katzenellenbogen, on whose investi- 
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 218
  gations and report the respondent had also relied upon in formulating the charges, was not called upon to testify. Wienand had testified that he was called to the enquiry but was there for about ten minutes after being asked about two questions. Under cross-examination, he contended that he did not even know the reason he was called to that enquiry. In light of the applicant being deprived of the benefit of the evidence of Katzenellenbogen, and given the intense cross-examination the applicant was subjected to by the chairperson of the enquiry, it is improbable that the chairperson could have come to any rational decision.
The allegation that the applicant was not informed or issued with written reasons for her dismissal and that she was not advised as to where to refer the matter, is again a red herring. It is not expected of internal hearing presiding officers to issue long drawn judgments to explain the reasoning behind their decisions. Page 62 contains notification of the results of the hearing and the applicant is further advised of her rights to refer the matter to the bargaining council. Roets’ contentions in this regard are without substance and another exercise at a fish expedition.
The appeal hearing lodged by the applicant was handled in a manner that clearly indicated that the respondent did not really appreciate the concept of a fair hearing. Firstly, the hearing was presided over by Nsele, who had assisted Dreyer in drafting the charges against the applicant. Secondly, only Nsele and the applicant were present at the enquiry. Nsele’s justification for this one-on-one appeal hearing was that the applicant had not asked him to bring any witnesses or advised him that she would be bringing any witnesses. Having admitted to being heavily involved in the formulation of charges, and when it was pointed out to him that the company should have asked another person to preside over the enquiry, Nsele’s response was that as the person who would ordinarily have handled the matter in terms of the respondent’s line management, he was obliged to act as presiding officer, and had tried to be as objective as possible.
The appeal hearing was in the circumstances outlined above, so grossly irregular that it was a nullity. It is highly improbable that Nsele, having been so extensively involved in the matter from its inception, could have shown an iota of objectivity. Again, as it had happened at the initial enquiry, the chairperson’s role was confused with that of prosecutor. In the end, and in the absence of any witnesses, or anyone defending the appeal on behalf of the respondent, Nsele had acted as presiding officer, prosecutor and executioner. The explanation that there was no other person who could have presided over the enquiry in terms of the respondent’s line management is absolute rubbish. These are excuses to be expected from little corner fish and chips shops’ and not from a big organisation like the respondent.

Relief
Having established that there is no reason to interfere with the respondent’s decision to dismiss the applicant, but however having found that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally flawed, the issue to be  
[2007] 3 BALR 197 (MEIBC) at 219
  determined is what relief should be awarded to the applicant. It is trite that in an event that a dismissal is found to be procedurally defective, the only remedy available to the applicant employee is that of a consideration of compensation.
In this case, albeit it was found that the procedure in dismissing the applicant was found to be defective in many material respects, it further needs to be taken into account that the applicant did not approach these proceedings as an innocent party. She was negligent in her duties; had allowed cash rolling; had actively encouraged cash rolling and unauthorised borrowing of monies from the respondent’s cash sales; had literally allowed the respondent’s cash deposits to be plundered; had failed to raise alarm bells when she was obliged to do so; had waived her right to testify in rebuttal; had failed to show any remorse and instead considered herself a victim and a scapegoat when this was not the case. The applicant had failed to atone to her misdemeanours and depicted herself as a victim. Having taken all these factors into account and the fact that the applicant failed to acknowledge the consequences of her misconduct, it is my view that any compensation as a consequence of procedural defects should be nominal in the strict sense. Accordingly, compensation in the amount equal to one month’s salary is deemed to be fair and equitable. Thus the following award is made.

Award
The dismissal of the applicant Botha was substantively fair.
Her dismissal was however procedurally unfair.
The respondent, Macsteel (Pty) Ltd, is ordered to pay to the applicant compensation in the amount equal to one month’s salary which is R7 550.
The abovementioned compensation amount shall be made due and payable to the applicant within 14 days from the date that the parties are in receipt of this award.
There is no order as to costs.

The following cases were reported in the above award:


Footnotes
1	 Also reported at [1996] 2 BLLR 205 (IC) – Ed.
2	 Also reported at [2006] 11 BLLR 1021 (SCA) – Ed.
3	 Also reported at [1999] 2 BLLR 108 (LAC) – Ed.
4	 Also reported at [1999] 11 BLLR 1117 (LAC) – Ed.


End of Document