



Baloyi / Rotek [2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Metal And Engineering Industries Bargaining Council
Case No: MEGA39646
Date: 16/09/2013
Before: R Bracks, Panellist
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(iv) of the LRA
Unfair labour practices — Promotion — Employee claiming he was unfairly denied promotion to advertised post in which he claimed to have been acting — Unfair labour practice not proved because employer did not act capriciously or depart from recruitment policy.

Editor’s Summary


After 30 years’ service, the applicant applied unsuccessfully for an advertised position in which he claimed he had effectively been acting. He alleged that the respondent’s failure to appoint him constituted an unfair labour practice because the guidelines set out in the respondent’s recruitment policy had not been followed, and because he had acquired a “legitimate expectation” to be appointed to the post. The respondent contended that the applicant did not have the competencies required for the post, and denied that he had been acting in it.

The Commissioner noted that “promotion” is the process by which employees advance in organisations. This is normally done by evaluating employees’ performance, or where vacancies arise. The Commissioner found it doubtful whether progression by applying for vacant posts constitutes “promotion”. While Commissioners are generally reluctant to interfere with employers’ decisions on promotion, they will do so where the employer has acted unfairly. Unfairness in this context means arbitrary, capricious or inconsistent conduct, or departure from an agreed procedure. Selection for promotion invariably results in one or more candidates being disappointed. Employees who have been acting in posts are not entitled to be promoted as of right, and the doctrine of legitimate expectation does not apply in such cases. 

The Commissioner held that the applicant had failed to prove that he had acted in the post, and that he could, accordingly, not have acquired an expectation of appointment on that basis. The position had been advertised, the applicant had been shortlisted and interviewed, and he had received the lowest score of the shortlisted candidates. Commissioners cannot override employers’ assessment of the merits of candidates unless the selection committee acted in a grossly unreasonable manner. This was not the case in this instance. The applicant had accordingly failed to prove that he was the victim of an unfair labour practice.

The application was dismissed. 

 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 106

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

[1]    Details of hearing and representation

This is an award of the arbitration held on 15 July and 12 September 2013 at the offices of the Centre for Dispute Resolution in Johannesburg. The applicant was represented by Mr Maurice Maditso a legal representative. Chabaesele Mohutsiwa the respondent’s IR Specialist represented it. 

The parties submitted a pre-arb minute dated 8 July 2013.

[2]  The issue to be decided

The issue to be decided was whether or not:

The applicant was acting as a HCM BP for Support Services;
A reasonable expectation was created that the applicant would be appointed permanently as HCM BP for Support Services; and
The respondent followed a fair recruitment and selection process

[3]    Summary of evidence

The applicant’s case

  It was the applicant’s case that the company’s failure to promote him was unfair. In order to support his case he testified as follows: 

  He had raised a grievance (A2) with the company in respect of its failure to promote him. The applicant proceeded to read the grievance and then gave detailed evidence in respect of his service and performance in the company. He referred to A20 which was an email and stated that he was acting with the knowledge of the manager and a number of other senior employees and in particular those whose names appear as addressees in the email. He was known to them as a business partner. As this evidence is a matter of record it will not be detailed in order not to burden the award unnecessarily. 

  He also referred to various updates in the company with particular reference to the February update and pointed out that once again he was referred to as a business update to such an extent that colleagues asked him why he had not informed them that he had been promoted. 

  Referring to the company’s policy, he stated that the company had failed to follow its own policy which required positions to be advertised internally first and only when suitable candidates were not found then it could advertise externally (A100–101 paragraphs 4.2 and 5.2). 

  He was referred to A87 paragraph 14.2.5 and said he had been acting within the company without the payment of any acting allowance. He then proceeded to explain his history in the company over the period of 30 years highlighting the fact that during his time of acting he had signed off for people who were appointed, he had to do verifications of qualifications, he managed the recruitment process and had to ensure that the whole process was properly followed. He went on to explain how his role  
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 107
  in performance management was divided into different categories emphasising that over all these years he had gained immense experience. 

  He was referred to A56 which was his performance contract and gave detailed evidence on it which will not be repeated save to state that during the performance appraisal he obtained a score of 4.3 out of 5 and that this was in respect of the position he was acting in. 

  While waiting for the results of the interview another news letter was produced in which his name again appeared as business partner (A21). He had raised a grievance with the company which was not properly handled by it and this showed him clearly that the company had no intention of following its own policies. He informed them that if they were not interested in the grievance he would escalate it to Council. He proceeded once again to explain his functions and involvement in different aspects of the human resource functions he performed. Some of these functions also went with the recruitment requests. 

  After being referred to A18 another email sent to him and various other addressees whom he said were all business partners he said that this clearly indicated that he was also a business partner. 

  Under cross-examination, it was disputed that the applicant formed part of the house agreement as this involved only the bargaining unit made up of the unions representing their members. The applicant was adamant that he fell under the scope of this agreement even though the agreement itself defined the bargaining unit as the union and its members. 

  In respect of the issue of the grievance it emerged that the applicant had refused to attend the final feedback session to advise him of the outcome of the grievance. The applicant was also referred to the policy of the company paragraph 5.2.1 and it was pointed out to him that the company’s policy allowed it to advertise widely both internally and externally. The applicant continued to deny this. 

  Regarding the acting of the applicant he conceded that despite completing a form which would have entitled him to be paid an acting allowance it was never signed by his superior. He explained that the superior had advised him that she would be fulfilling the acting role herself. 

  The applicant called one witness Sholdin Molo who testified that he was employed by the respondent in November 1984 and had been a shopsteward since 1987. He sits in the negotiating forum. There were three documents which they were party to. These were the Recognition Agreement, the House Agreement and the Disciplinary Code. He explained his role as a shopsteward in this regard and what the documents entailed. 

  The Recognition Agreement was applicable to the bargaining unit. He read clause 4.1.20 and said that although in terms of this clause management was excluded in practice the agreement also covered management as the documents were applicable to everyone. The only thing excluded in the House Agreement was the salaries. He stated he had even represented junior managers at the level of the applicant in disciplinary hearings. 

 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 108

  The agreement provided that where a person had acted for longer than 4 months in a particular position he should be appointed into that position. He and the applicant were once shopstewards until the applicant was appointed junior manager. The applicant had also acted as a senior HR. He proceeded to explain the applicant’s role within the organisation. 

  Under cross-examination, he said the house agreement was negotiated once a year. He confirmed that junior managers were excluded from those negotiations because of their salary level. He insisted that despite this it had always been the company’s policy that all the negotiated terms and conditions would also be applicable to junior managers. The rest of the cross-examination of the witness did not present any significant evidence except that there was a great deal of argument on issues not relevant to this matter. 

The applicant’s closing arguments

   The applicant’s representative made reference to various case law authorities. According to him a legitimate expectation had been created that the applicant would be appointed to the position as he had accumulated immense experience over the 30 years and there was a duty on the company to recognise this. He also made reference to the Constitution and the Equity Act emphasising the requirement that recognition should be given to prior learning. 

  He stated further that the respondent’s policy required internal advertising to be done first and that the main purpose of this was to ensure that the internal applicants be recognised for their experience. 

  In respect of the issue of legitimate expectation, he stated that the applicant had acted in that position and the company had confirmed this through various updates and emails referring to the applicant as business partner. He submitted that I should find in applicant’s favour.

The respondent’s case

  The respondent’s first witness Sue Gugulethu Nkumane testified that she was the recruitment practitioner and was involved in the selection process of the applicant. They started by short listing the candidates after which they interviewed them and then appointed the successful candidate. A fair selection process was followed. She referred to R8-27 and said it was the policy the company used. In R8-30 paragraph 5.2 the policy made provision for advertising positions both internally and externally. The necessary authority was obtained to advertise the position and the short listing was done in terms of the job specs. 

  Competencies were normally identified through the recruitment process. She was referred to R4-39 and pointed out that it was the screening sheet used for short listing the applicants. It was also used in the case of the applicant. There were six applicants: 3 internal and 3 external but one of the external applicants withdrew from the process. She was referred to R8-29 clause 4 and stated that internal candidates were to be given first right of refusal. The clause became relevant at the end of the process. 

 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 109

  She was referred to R4-24 which was the interview scoring sheet of the witness. The applicant did not display the competencies required for the position. There was a panel of 3 people whom she named. The other two panelists also did not recommend the applicant. She was referred to R4-22 and said it was the scoring sheet of Mawaisha who was successful but had to withdraw due to a criminal record. She went on to detail those who were appointed in various positions and the reasons for this. She also explained why it took a while to notify the candidates of the outcome of the interviews. 

  At the end of the applicant’s interview he wanted to know how he had performed because he had a feeling that things did not go too well. She told him he should know better than to ask. 

   Under cross-examination, the witness explained that first preference was given to internal candidates which meant that if there was an internal candidate who scored the same as an external candidate preference would be given to the internal candidate. The applicant applied for one of the new positions which became available after the company had undergone restructuring. The positions were previously advertised internally but no suitable candidates were found. 

  Regarding the appearance of the applicant’s name on the various updates she said she was informed that at the time the applicant was the only HR person in support services and hence the fact that he was mentioned in the documentation and he was responsible for handling all the HR queries. 

  The respondent’s second witness Tsidi Sentle testified that she was the Human Capital Business Head. She explained who reported to her. The applicant lodged a grievance around 18 March 2013. According to the policy they had 5 working days to respond to the grievance. A hearing was held on 27 March which was in accordance with the 5 working days. At the hearing Siyakudumisa a shopsteward from NUM represented the applicant. She was present as well as Philip Mohutsiwa. 

  She was referred to R1-6 which was a grievance form completed by the applicant. His complete grievance was on R1-7 to 9. During the hearing the applicant was allowed to present his grievance. At the end of the process management went off to apply their mind and the applicant was invited to a feedback session on 12 April 2013. Feedback was in a written format. The applicant and his representative however failed to attend the session. The procedure was clear that when there was no resolution the matter should be escalated to the next level which the applicant failed to do. 

  In respect of the applicant acting she said that he was never appointed to act as a partner since there would have been a delegation of authority which would have had to be signed by him. She was referred to R2-10 which was a form authorising the payment of an acting fee. The applicant had presented this document to her and she informed him that she would be acting. 

 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 110

  She was referred to A38 and said that the reason the applicant’s signature appeared on the document was because the company required a segregation of duty. This meant that she was not entitled to sign and approve anything she had initiated. This also applied to A32.

   In respect of the house agreement she explained the applicant was at level T11 which was junior management level. The bargaining unit stopped at T10. The position for which the applicant applied was advertised both internally and externally after no suitable internal candidates were identified. 

  On the issue of the applicant’s legitimate expectation to be appointed to the position she explained that this document could never have created an expectation as it was clearly a communication document. In fact the document contained a disclaimer. The applicant’s name was given by her as part of her delegation as he did not have the full functions of the role. This was borne out by the fact that he did not attend many of the business partner meetings nor did he perform a number of other functions of business partners. In fact there were other people besides the applicant whose names appeared on that document who was not business partners. One was one Farana Domingo. Also, in the last documents the applicant referred to where his name appeared the incumbent for the position he had applied for had already been appointed and therefore it cannot be true that a legitimate expectation had been created. 

  After the interview the applicant spoke to her because she had asked him how the interview had gone. He said it was tough. She was then referred to the inside sleeve and said they were communication documents and her name was listed for support services. 

  Under cross-examination she reiterated that the reason the applicant’s name appeared as a business partner was merely because he had to provide information and assist with queries relating to human resource matters as he was the only HR person in support services. At no stage was the applicant part of the meetings which for example would include succession planning. The applicant was assigned a function and not a role and in her view there would have been no need for her to inform him about this. 

  Nothing further of significance emerged from the cross-examination of this witness. 

The respondent’s closing arguments

  The respondent’s representative submitted that the applicant had failed to show that he was appointed to act by his own admission and the evidence of the various witnesses. 

  He also denied that a reasonable expectation was created as the applicant relied on the notifications one of which was circulated after the incumbent was already appointed which he was aware of.

  The respondent followed a fair procedure by advertising internally and externally as previous internal adverts could not elicit suitable candidates  
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 111
  for the position. At the selection all the applicants were subjected to the same scrutiny and the applicant was found not to be competent. I should find in respondent’s favour.

[4]    Analysis of evidence and argument

The legal position
Unfair labour practices are currently regulated by section 185 and section 186 of the LRA. Section 185(b) states that every employee has the right not to be subjected to unfair labour practices, while section 186(2) contains the three remaining residual unfair labour practices and one further unfair labour practice.
Section 186(2) reads as follows:

“‘Unfair labour practice’ means any unfair act or omission that arises between an employer and an employee involving –

(a) unfair conduct by the employer relating to the promotion, demotion, probation (excluding disputes about dismissals for a reason relating to probation) or training of an employee or relating to benefits to an employee;
(b) the unfair suspension of an employee or any other unfair disciplinary action short of dismissal in respect of an employee;
(c) a failure or refusal by an employer to reinstate or re-employ a former employee in terms of any agreement; and
(d) an occupational detriment, other than dismissal, in contravention of the protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act 26 of 2000), on account of the employee having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.”
An employer is guilty of an unfair labour practice if the employer commits any form of unfair conduct relating to the promotion, demotion, probation or training of an employee. From this it is clear that three core issues arise. Firstly, a definition of promotion is necessary; secondly, unfair conduct relating to promotions needs to be explained; and thirdly, the remedies that may be granted and the appropriate methods of dispute resolution need to be discussed.
“Promotion” can be defined in terms of two general systems used by most employers through which employees may advance or progress in an organisation. Generally speaking, most employees are evaluated on a regular basis before progressing from one level of employment to another. In other words, based on the outcome of their evaluation, employees are promoted by their employers, resulting in greater remuneration or benefits in respect of their employment relationship. 
Employees may also be promoted by means of a system where certain vacancies are advertised and current employees are also invited to apply for such posts. Should a current employee be awarded the position, which will obviously be more favourable in respect of remuneration and/or benefits, academics argue that a promotion has taken place.
The issue to be decided in cases involving level progression was whether the employer had committed an unfair labour practice as envisaged in Schedule 7 item 2(1)(b) of the Labour Relations Act. Commissioner  
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 112
  Hambridge, after considering all the evidence expressed the common law view in Public Servants Association v Northern Cape Provincial Administration (1997) 18 ILJ 1137 (CCMA) that:

“as the employee had applied for a post, duly advertised in a newspaper, such application, should it be successful, could not be a promotion. Although the appointment would have been made in the same department, it would not constitute a promotion as a promotion is usually an internal matter. Thus the employee is in fact a job applicant and item 2(1)(b) of Schedule 7 of the Act could not be of assistance, as job applicants are not eligible for promotion, demotion, training or benefits.”

The South African labour law experts have different ways of understanding the way in which common law lawfulness has developed into a legislative fairness. It is, therefore, necessary to examine what could constitute unfair conduct by an employer. As a rule employees generally have no right to promotion and the employer has the right to appoint or promote employees whom it considers to be the most suitable. The CCMA and the Labour Court are loath to interfere with employer prerogative.
However, the CCMA has on occasion shown a willingness to scrutinise the reasons behind the employer’s decision to ensure that, with due deference to the employer’s prerogative, there is a logical connection between the real reasons and the decision taken. It is obvious that when choosing between two parties, one would have to discriminate between the two in order to choose one.
According to Garbers, “unfair” implies a failure by the employer to meet an objective standard and may be taken to include arbitrary, capricious or inconsistent conduct, whether negligent or intended. Should an employee be unhappy, or perceive the conduct of the employer to be unfair in not promoting such employee, then such unhappiness or perceptions do not necessarily amount to unfairness.
It is trite that where a procedure is laid down in legislation, a collective agreement, established practice, equity plan or directive, then an employer is bound to follow such procedure. Deviation from such procedure is permissible only where the employer can show that a good and sufficient reason for the deviation exists.
Nevertheless in the present case, the applicant is unhappy that he was not promoted especially since he had acted in the position and was according to him highly scored in his assessment. In this regard I wish to refer to Commissioner Newall’s comment in SA Municipal Workers Union obo Damon v Cape Metropolitan Council (1999) 20 ILJ 714 (CCMA) who was called upon to adjudicate on a matter dealing with “unhappy perceptions” by an employee concerning a promotion. In analysing the evidence, Commissioner Newall stated:

“The onus is on the union to make a case of unfair labour practice (my emphasis) and to do so, it needs to examine the reasons why its member was not appointed and identify defective reasoning on the part of the appointing authority. Unless the appointing authority were shown to have not applied its mind in the selection of the successful candidate, the CCMA may not interfere with the prerogative of the employer to appoint whom it considers to be the best candidate. (My emphasis.)”

Turning now to people in acting capacities it is trite that employees who act in these higher positions are not automatically entitled to be appointed to such a post. Public Servants Association and others v Department of Correctional Services (1998) 19 ILJ 1655 (CCMA) at 1673A. It is possible that such an employee may raise the doctrine of legitimate expectation in not being promoted to such a post. This defence however has not always been met with a favourable outcome. 
This is well illustrated in the case of Public Servants Association obo Botes and others v Department of Justice (2000) 21 ILJ 690 (CCMA) – is the case in point. The four applicant employees all held positions as senior assistant state attorneys within the Department of Justice. At different times during 1994 and 1995 they were instructed to act as deputy state attorney within their section of the employer department. The duties and responsibilities they had were the same as that of the permanent appointees as section heads, which included the management of their sections. The Public Service Regulations make no provision for the payment of an allowance to officers acting in positions more senior than their own, and the applicants received no additional remuneration. From the facts it is clear that the applicants sought remedies on the basis of two claims. The one being a claim for compensation and the other a claim for promotion. The first claim deals with benefits and does not warrant discussion at this point. The applicants contended secondly that the department had created a legitimate expectation that they would be promoted. Commissioner Hiemstra dismissed this contention on the basis that: “The CCMA is not the forum where the ambit of this doctrine should incrementally be expanded.” He declined to make an award that the applicants should be promoted on the basis of a legitimate expectation.

  He stated further that:

“Legitimate expectation to be promoted is however not the only basis upon which the promotion of the applicants could be considered. If I should find, regardless of whether the applicants had a legitimate expectation to be promoted, or whether I can order their promotion based on that doctrine, that the conduct of the respondent had been unfair to them, then I must nevertheless determine the dispute on reasonable terms.”


Commissioner Hiemstra then stated that in assessing the dispute on reasonable terms, the first question is always whether the employer acted unfairly. According to the Commissioner, apart from considering fairness from the view of the applicants, one must also consider the reasons for the  
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 114
  actions of the employer, namely whether the employer had acted frivolously, capriciously or unreasonably. In making the award, Commissioner Hiemstra stated:

“Although the applicants had been deeply frustrated by the long acting appointments, I cannot find that the respondent had committed an unfair act or omission relating to their promotion. It is certainly undesirable to require of employees to act in more senior positions for such long periods without additional compensation. However, the respondent has given compelling reasons for allowing the situation to continue for inordinately long periods of time . . . The hardship that the applicants have suffered is the result of the transformation process and the fact that, in the absence of a collective agreement or legislative provision, there is no legally enforceable remedy to compel payment for acting in a more senior position . . . Although ‘fairness’ is superimposed upon the duty to act lawfully, the power of the CCMA to pronounce on the fairness of the actions of the employers should be used sparingly, especially where the decision under consideration falls within the domain of managerial prerogative.”

Applying the law to the facts in this matter I am required to consider the following in terms of the pre-Arbitration agreement between the parties and that is whether or not: 
the applicant was acting as a HCM BP for Support Services;
A reasonable expectation was created that the applicant would be appointed permanently as HCM BP for Support Services; and
The respondent followed a fair recruitment and selection process.
From the undisputed evidence presented it was clear that there was no documentation to prove that the applicant had in anyway acted in the position. In fact during cross-examination the applicant had conceded that he was never appointed to act. This was further confirmed in the evidence of both the respondent’s witnesses which was not at all disputed. It, therefore, follows that he cannot rely on the provision in the agreement which provides that if an employee acts for more than 4 months such employee should be appointed to the position. 
In light hereof, I am persuaded that the applicant was never appointed to act and therefore the clause was not applicable to him. Even if he was indeed appointed to act when the law is applied to the facts it is further clear that this alone does not entitle him to be appointed to the position.
The second issue is whether or not a legitimate expectation was created. By his own admission the evidence shows he was not appointed so he could not rely on that. The documents he relied on have a disclaimer which states “Although the people listed below are not strictly speaking ‘business partners’ as some of those positions are still vacant and they are merely acting in this role . . .” In the case of the applicant he knew he was not acting so it cannot be held that he was under a misapprehension as he was told by Sentle that she would act in the position. No delegation of authority was given to him or accepted by him. The only logical conclusion the applicant could have come to was that he was only performing specific HR functions and not those of a business partner. 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 115
For this reason it is my view that the words of Hiemstra above namely “Although ‘fairness’ is superimposed upon the duty to act lawfully, the power of the CCMA to pronounce on the fairness of the actions of the employers should be used sparingly, especially where the decision under consideration falls within the domain of managerial prerogative” would also apply in the present case.
Finally, did the respondent follow a fair promotion procedure? Evidence shows that the position was advertised, the applicant was shortlisted and interviewed and obtained the lowest score.
Substantive fairness relates to the real reasons why an employer ultimately decides to prefer one employee over another. It is trite that the CCMA will not readily interfere with an employer’s prerogative to choose whom it deems suitable for promotion, as long as it is within the realms of fairness. This is evident in the case of Marra v Telkom SA Ltd (1999) 20 ILJ 1964 (CCMA). In this case the employee party was employed by Telkom since 1971. He was upgraded to C1 on the Patterson scale in 1994. His work was evaluated in 1995 and 1996 by a process that formed part of a collective agreement between the employer and the employee’s trade union. The employee was not satisfied with that evaluation and started an appeal process in terms of that agreement. Marra’s complaint was that Telkom committed an unfair labour practice because it graded him unfairly and inconsistently and refused to remedy this. He further claimed that Telkom unfairly barred him from acquiring skills and that he should have been rotated between departments to expose him to different technologies, equipment and learning opportunities. 
Commissioner Christie responded to this argument as follows:

“It may well have been in Marra’s personal interests to be moved to a department in which he would have been exposed to more complex optic system functions. But in my view (in the absence of contractual or collective agreement) management of an enterprise has a prerogative to determine its own operational requirements and deploy its human resources to meet those needs . . . But, employees’ personal interests need to be consistent with the needs of the enterprise, not as objectively determined in a perfect corporation, but as determined by those who have legitimate power to manage the enterprise. It is not the job of labour law to interfere in the management style of an enterprise except where management style is manifestly arbitrary or it unfairly discriminates or victimises staff for union affiliation.”

Similarly in Van Rensburg, Commissioner Cloete stated that:

“I cannot detect any aspect of the interview or the treatment of Mr Van Rensburg at the hands of the panel that was so glaring or grossly unreasonable so as to warrant the rescission of the recommendations that the panel made, and its replacement with recommendations or decisions of my own . . .”

 24. The Labour Court and the CCMA have on occasion declared that when an employer exercises its managerial prerogative in coming to a decision on who gets appointed, such employer has to be in a position to provide reasons for its decision. The CCMA will  assess the reasons given by the employer (usually through the “deliberation process” of the selection panel) to ensure that there is a logical connection between the real reasons given and the decision taken.

 
[2014] 2 BALR 105 (MEIBC) at 116
The applicant was found to be incompetent for the position and he has failed to convince me that the respondent had acted unfairly in coming to this conclusion. In fact, the applicant’s case was based on a legitimate expectation which the company had created and the fact that he had worked himself up through the ranks, but he has not proven to me that at the interview he was found by the panel to be competent for the position he was applying for. 
In light of the above, it is clear that the applicant has failed to discharge the onus that the failure of the respondent to promote him was unfair.

[5]    Award

The case against the respondent is dismissed.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document