



IMATU obo Pellow / Ethekwini Municipality – Electricity [2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC)
Judgments Online

Division: Durban
Case No: EMD 091024
Hearing Date(s): 10 / 2 / 2011
Award Date(s): 28 / 02 / 2011
Before: M Cowling


Keywords


Labour Law — Misconduct — Insubordination — Aggression — Lack of respect for authority — Suspension without pay

Mini Summary


The applicant had been found guilty on one charge of misconduct for being rude and aggressive when he entered his superintendent’s (Sheila Cele’s) office while she was in a meeting with the other employees. A dispute had earlier arisen between the applicant and Cele over his request for an assistant and the Cele’s nomination of a person the applicant (Busi Sibiya) did not want. He declined Sibiya’s services and then, when he noticed that Sibiya had been booked for overtime on the day and time in question, he barged into a meeting being held by Cele and angrily confronted her, suggesting that the booking of Sibiya for overtime amounted to fraud.

Held that the versions of the respective parties were diametrically opposed. However, the evidence of witness De Azevedo supported the respondent’s version in general and Cele’s testimony in particular. He came across as a truthful witness and his evidence corroborated Cele’s testimony in all material respects. The applicant was unable to furnish any reason as to why De Azevedo would have falsely implicated him. According to this evidence, the applicant had an extremely short temper. Thus, when his regular assistant failed to appear, he made up his mind that he wanted to the services of Qhingana. Instead, Cele said that he should work with Sibiya. The applicant became angry and raised his voice in anger and slammed the workshop door. On the second occasion, he confronted Cele with fraudulent conduct in the presence of Mr Dougall and De Azevedo, which was totally inappropriate. Whether or not the applicant was justified in his perceptions of fraudulent conduct by the adding of Sibiya’s name to his timesheet, this should have been discussed in private. The applicant lost his temper and acted in an aggressive manner towards someone in authority over him and to whom he had to report directly. This constituted misconduct in the form of insubordination.

The applicant showed lack of respect for Cele in particular or those in authority over him in general and the sanction of 10 days suspension without pay was fair.

 
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 2




[1]    Details of hearing and representation

This arbitration took place on Thursday 10 February 2011 in the small executive board room of the Electricity Department. The respondent was represented by E Nomnganga whereas the applicant was represented by R Gumede.

It was agreed that the parties would submit written closing arguments by 17 February. This was duly done and I am indebted to the representatives in this respect.

[2]    Issue to be determined

The applicant had been found guilty on one charge of misconduct. The charge was as follows: "You were rude and aggressive when you entered your superintendent's office while she was having a discussion or in the meeting with the other employees (De Azevedo)." This incident occurred on 3 June 2010 and the superintendent in question was Sheila Cele.

[3]    Background to the dispute

The applicant is a senior electrician employed in the switch gear section of the Electricity Department. Cele is the superintendent of that section and the  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 3
applicant reports directly to her. The charges arose out of an alleged dispute about the use of a particular assistant whom the applicant wanted to work with.

It was alleged that the applicant did not utilise the services of a particular assistant on Saturday 22 May 2010 when the section was working overtime. Instead, he used another assistant in order to provide help in loading heavy machinery in the workshop.

The crux of the charge arose on 3 June when the applicant ascertained that his time-sheet had been amended by the addition of another employee. It was subsequently ascertained that this other employee was the assistant whom the applicant had initially been instructed by Cele to use on 22 May. Since he had not utilised this assistant and yet her staff number appeared on his timesheet above his signature, the applicant considered this to be a form of fraud and Cele stated that the adding of names on timesheets was a common practice that was necessary in order to ensure that the said assistant got paid for the overtime. The applicant confronted her over this issue on 3 June 2010 and it was during this confrontation that the actions that formed the substance of the charges were allegedly performed.

A disciplinary hearing was held and the applicant was found guilty of this charge whereas two other charges were withdrawn and he was found not guilty on the fourth. He was sentenced to 10 days suspension without pay. It is in respect of the finding of guilt and sentence that the applicant is referring the matter to arbitration.

[4]    Survey of evidence and argument

Cele testified on behalf of the respondent that she was working in the workshop with the other staff in the section on Saturday 22 May 2010 when the applicant approached her and asked her if he could have an assistant because  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 4
his assistant had not arrived on that day. He was based in his work area at the time.

Cele informed him that Busi Sibiya could act as his assistant. However, he informed her that he did not want to work with women. Cele then informed him that Busi was the only assistant that was available.

The applicant then said that he wished to work with Aaron Qhingana.

Cele testified that she again informed the applicant that Sibiya was the only assistant who was available. Thereafter, according to Cele, the applicant became aggressive and said that he was "sick and tired of this place". He then exited while slamming the door of the workshop.

As far as Cele was concerned, the applicant had been instructed to book Busi Sibiya and therefore was obliged to work with her on that particular day. This then should have been reflected in the applicant's timesheet. However, on 3 June, when the timesheets were due to be sent through to payroll, Cele noticed that Busi's name was not reflected. This meant that she would not get paid. As a result she filled in Busi's particulars on the applicant's timesheet and submitted it. This was all done on 2 June in order for the timesheets to be referred to payroll on 3 June.

Subsequently, on 3 June, Cele was having a meeting with Neil Dougall and Fernando de Azevedo. She then noticed the applicant coming in to her office while she was busy with the other two. The applicant asked Dougall about the timesheet.

As far as Cele was concerned, the applicant was disturbing them as they were discussing another matter. However, since she was obviously aware that she had  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 5
amended the timesheet she knew what he was talking about and informed him that she had made the amendments.

He then became aggressive and shouted at her accusing her of committing fraud. He was also banging his fist on the table. Dougall stepped out whereas De Azevedo tried to calm him down.

At this stage he was extremely aggressive and Cele felt that the only option was to ask him to leave her office which he initially refused to do. She then stood up and asked him again to leave whereupon he left. In this regard she testified that he only left after the third request/instruction to do so.

His level of aggression was far worse than the incident at the workshop on 22 May. It commenced with the fact that he did not knock on her office door and subsequently entered while there were people in her office at the time. She felt that he was disrespectful and his shouting and hovering over her, intimidating her. She summed up his conduct by saying that he was rude, disrespectful and intimidating.

In cross-examination Cele conceded that the time sheet was a legal document but she needed to ensure that everyone was catered for in the timesheet in the sense that they would get paid for work done. She further stipulated that the policy of the respondent allows her to alter the timesheet since its most important function is that it is the authority for which people can get paid. If they do not appear on a timesheet they will not get paid and Cele was concerned that she had instructed the applicant to utilise the services of Sibiya on that Saturday 22 May 2010 but it appeared from the timesheet that he obviously refused to do so. She did not know where Sibiya was deployed but she knew that the latter was obviously at work on that particular day. She attempted to discuss this with the applicant before doing so but he was on leave at the time so therefore it  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 6
was important that she made the amendments unilaterally in order to meet the deadline of 2 June.

Thereafter the applicant testified to the effect that his assistant failed to arrive on 22 May. This was unusual – particularly since the applicant was unable to get hold of him via telephone. Since he was moving heavy switchgear in his work area he needed an assistant. He therefore approached Cele and on his way he noticed that there were a number of assistants hanging around not doing anything.

On approaching Cele he asked her if they had been allocated to anyone. He was particularly keen for Aaron Qhingana to assist him because he ordinarily assisted Phillip van Niekerk whom the applicant knew was not present on that day.

It seems that a form of disagreement arose between De Azevedo and the applicant as to who would be using Qhingana. In particular, the applicant was concerned why Cele informed him that if he wanted to utilise Qhingana he needed to ask De Azevedo. This was because she was the superintendent and both he and De Azevedo reported to her.

He further denied that he had been instructed to take Sibiya as an assistant. However, he did say that he felt it was inappropriate for her to engage in the physically demanding task of moving heavy switchgear machinery. However, in the middle of this, the applicant was informed that his regular assistant had phoned and said that he was running late. As a result, the applicant utilised him on that particular day.

The applicant thereafter recalls handing in his timesheet (which did not indicate that Sibiya had worked for him on the basis that she had not) on Wednesday 25 May. He said that Ms Cele was present and she could have questioned him  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 7
on that day. However, he checked his timesheet on 3 June and noticed that an additional assistant had been added to the timesheet. Since only the staff number appeared on the timesheet the applicant did not know who this was. As a result he wished to approach Cele in order to find out what had happened. When he got to her office the door was open. There was nothing unusual about this as she conceded that she had an "open door" policy.

The applicant then noticed that Neil Dougall had walked in from the workshop entrance (which is on the opposite side from where the applicant was standing) and as a result he felt that he could also walk in. Cele was engaged in a discussion with De Azevedo at this stage.

According to the applicant he and Dougall discussed the timesheet and the latter invited him over to a board which was posted on one of the walls of Cele's office where it would be possible to ascertain which employee had the staff number that appeared on the timesheet. As a result they were able to ascertain that this was Sibiya's staff number.

While the applicant was discussing this with Dougall, Cele suddenly interrupted him and indicated that it was she who had put Sibiya on the applicant's timesheet. According to the applicant she did not have the authority to do this – particularly since it was placed above his signature. However, her response was that she did have a right to make these alterations. The applicant denies banging on the desk. All he did was read out what was stated on the sheet. Cele responded by saying that it was too late to make any changes. De Azevedo then intervened and the applicant informed him that this had nothing to do with him so therefore he should keep out.

Cele then instructed the applicant to leave her office. The applicant attempted to intervene but she simply shouted that he must get out of her office. Thereafter the applicant left and went to Nomnganga's office. The latter is the manager to  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 8
whom Cele reports. According to the applicant, he explained to Nomnganga that he wanted a clear timesheet. Nomnganga then informed him that he would attempt to sort this out. The following morning the applicant was given a new timesheet that did not have Sibiya's particulars.

Thereafter the applicant ascertained that the new form had not been submitted and it was on this basis that he then referred this matter to the ombudsman as well as submitting the grievance form.

During cross-examination the applicant was quite adamant, even though the switchgear was ultimately loaded and moved by the forklift, that this heavy machinery had to be loaded on to the actual forks of the forklift. This required strength which he believed Sibiya was lacking. However, this was disputed by Cele who testified that all electrical assistants have the same job description and therefore are expected to do the same type of work. She further confirmed that Sibiya was sufficiently strong to do the work.

Ultimately the applicant denies in any way exhibiting any anger or aggression towards Cele. However, he remains adamant that the conduct was fraudulent.

The respondent indicated that De Azevedo was available on standby as a witness when Cele had completed her testimony I indicated that, in a case of this nature, it would be more preferable to hear the applicant's version and then to call De Azevedo in order to attempt to identify any conflicts that might exist.

After the applicant had testified it was quite clear that, although the background context was common ground, the two versions were diametrically opposed to each other. As a result Azevedo was called to testify.

It was quite clear from the outset that he supported the respondent's version. In regard to the incident on 22 May he testified to the effect that the applicant  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 9
became angry when Cele informed him that he could not use Aaron Qhingana as his assistant and that he should use Sibiya.

De Azevedo attributed this to the fact that the applicant had a very short temper which tended to erupt when he did not get his own way. He also confirmed that the applicant slammed the workshop door when he left. He was quite emphatic that this had occurred.

In regard to the incident on 3 June he confirmed that he was in Cele's office and that the applicant entered the office before Dougall. He also was adamant that the applicant spoke to Cele before he spoke to Dougall. He spoke in a fairly loud tone as De Azevedo was able to clearly discern that the applicant was demanding to know who had been entered on to his timesheet. It was at this stage that Dougall intervened and said that they would look up the number on the notice board. He also confirmed that the applicant became angry and that there was an exchange of words between himself and Cele after the latter had informed him that she was the one who had entered Sibiya's number on the timesheet.

De Azevedo attempted to assist but was instructed in a fairly threatening manner by the applicant to stay out of this as it had nothing to do with him. He was also pointing vigorously at the charge sheet and accusing Cele of having committed fraud. By this stage Dougall had already left the office and Cele instructed the applicant on at least three occasions to leave the office. He thereafter walked out and threatened that he was going to take this further.

As far as Cele's entry of Sibiya on the timesheet is concerned De Azevedo indicated that there was nothing wrong with this. In other words it was fairly common practice since, if the electrician failed to appear for overtime work and the assistant was present the latter would have to be paid on someone's timesheet. Therefore he did not regard this as fraudulent in any way. Azevedo  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 10
also indicated that Sibiya was physically strong and there was nothing that prevented her from assisting the applicant to move the machinery. Therefore there was no valid reason why he should have been assisted by Aaron Qhingana instead of Sibiya as his assistant on that particular day.

[5]    Analysis of evidence and argument

As pointed out above the two versions of the respective parties are diametrically opposed. On the face of it, it is difficult to determine which of these is the truth since both versions have explanations that have a ring of probability to it. It is also impossible to reconcile the two versions. However, an important factor is the testimony of De Azevedo who supported the respondent's version in general and Cele's testimony in particular.

In his written submission, Gumede pointed out certain inconsistencies and contradictions in the testimony of Cele and De Azevedo. However, I find that these were of a minor nature and do not detract from the fact that De Azevedo came across as a truthful witness. Thus, to the extent that it is relevant, he corroborated Cele's testimony in all material respects. In addition, De Azevedo's testimony must be evaluated in the context that the applicant was unable to furnish any reason as to why he would be willing to falsely testify in order to implicate the applicant in this particular regard.

On the basis of this I find that the applicant has an extremely short temper which can easily burst when he does not get his way. Thus, on the 22 May when the applicant's regular assistant failed to appear, he made up his mind that he wanted to utilise the services of Qhingana. Instead, Cele indicated that he should work with Busi Sibiya. There is sufficient evidence to justify the inference that the applicant became angry at this stage. I also find that he was unable to furnish any valid reason as to why Sibiya could not act as his assistant. His subjective  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 11
opinion that she was unable to lift heavy machinery was not borne out by Cele or De Azevedo. In any event Sibiya was employed as an assistant and lifting heavy equipment comes with the territory. I also find that he raised his voice in anger and slammed the workshop door when departing on that day.

As far as the incident on 3 June is concerned I find that there is nothing untoward about the applicant's initial entrance into the office. Cele testified that she has an open door policy and therefore the fact that the applicant merely walked in is neither here nor there. However, even on his own version, I find that confronting her with fraudulent conduct in the presence of Dougall and De Azevedo is totally inappropriate. Whether or not the applicant was justified in his perceptions of fraudulent conduct by adding Sibiya's name to his timesheet (and it is not necessary for me to make any finding in this respect) this should have been discussed between the two of them in private. In other words, the applicant should have waited until there was no one in the office before confronting Cele in this regard. The only reason for this conduct on the part of the applicant was it must be assumed that he lost his temper. Therefore, at the end of the day I find that he acted in an aggressive manner towards someone in authority over him and to whom he had to report directly. This constitutes misconduct in the form of insubordination.

As far as the appropriate sanction is concerned, the applicant was given 10 days suspension without pay at the conclusion of the disciplinary hearing. Nomnganga pointed out that, since the applicant has been a shop steward for a number of years, he should have been aware that this conduct was unacceptable. He further implied that the applicant seems to ignore the ordinary constraints that are imposed by the hierarchy at the work place and the fact that Cele is in a position of authority over him. Nomnganga further made allusions to the fact that the disrespect showed to Cele on the part of the applicant arose from the fact that the former was recently promoted to the position of superintendent and that she was the first woman to occupy that position within the Electricity  
[2012] JOL 28426 (SALGBC) at 12
Department. In addition, he also indicated that the applicant had ignored the ordinary grievance procedures by approaching the ombudsperson with this particular problem instead of following the usual channels. It was therefore argued that this was yet again symptomatic of his attitude.

These are obviously aggravating factors that would ordinarily justify dismissal. Gumede referred me to the well known case of Sidumo & another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd & others (reported at [2008] JOL 20811 (CC) – Ed) as authority for the fact that, as an arbitrator, I am entitled to substitute the decision of the disciplinary hearing with a fresh one and that I am not in any way bound to give it any consideration should I feel that it is incorrect. But this can work both ways in the sense that it is also possible for me to increase the sanction.

However, there is no evidence before me to substantiate this pattern of conduct attributed to the applicant by Nomnganga to the effect that he generally lacks respect for Cele in particular or those in authority over him in general. In addition I find that there is nothing untoward about the applicant approaching the ombudsperson because this forms part of the whistle-blowing policy.

At the end of the day I therefore find that there is no reason to justify my interference with the sanction of 10 days suspension without pay.

[6]    Order

The application is accordingly dismissed.

Appearance:
R Gumede (A); E Nomnganga (R)


End of Document