



Krieger / Measure For Measure [2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: ECPE8928-19
Date: 14/01/2020
Before: F du Toit, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal — Procedural fairness — Presiding officer conversing with complainant in absence of accused employee creating reasonable perception of bias — Dismissal procedurally unfair.
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Misconduct — Employee dismissed on various unproven charges — Dismissal unfair. 

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a site manager, was dismissed after being found guilty on charges of bringing the respondent’s name into disrepute, insubordination and conflict of interest. In a default hearing, he claimed that he did not understand the charges, that he had not been allowed to testify in his defence, that he had done nothing wrong and that the chair of his disciplinary hearing was biased.

The Commissioner held that the applicant’s undisputed evidence was that he had never disobeyed an instruction or been disrespectful. There was no evidence that the applicant had ever placed himself in a conflict of interest in the sense in which that expression is understood in law. As far as the charge of bringing the respondent’s name into disrepute was concerned, all the applicant had done was to ask one of the respondent’s clients for a reference. This could not have tarnished the respondent’s reputation.

The Commissioner found further that the presiding officer had conferred with the complainant before the hearing. This was sufficient to create a reasonable perception of bias.

As the applicant did not wish to be reinstated, he was awarded compensation equivalent to five months’ salary.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of the hearing and the representation
This unfair dismissal dispute was set down for con-arb in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“LRA”) at the CCMA offices in Port Elizabeth on 9 January 2020 at 3pm.
The applicant, Mr Charles Richard Krieger (“Mr Krieger”) was present and represented himself. The respondent was not present or represented. The proceedings were stood down for 30 minutes in order to allow the  
[2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA) at 845
  respondent an opportunity to attend the proceedings, but to no avail. The set down was sent to the respondent via email to hr@measureformeasure.co.za on 17 December 2019. There was also no objection in terms of rule 17 of the CCMA filed and the matter was therefore declared unresolved and proceeded to arbitration. 
The proceedings were digitally recorded. 

Issue to be decided
I am required to determine whether the applicant was dismissed and, if so, whether the dismissal was procedurally and substantively unfair.
The relief the applicant seeks is compensation. 

Background to the issue
The applicant has been within the respondent’s permanent employ for the past 5 years. He held the position of site manager at the time of his dismissal on 11 December 2019 following a hearing on the same day. He received notice of the aforesaid hearing on 9 December 2019. His salary was R 10 900 per month. 
The applicant was dismissed for 3 charges: Bringing the company name into disrepute, insubordination and conflict of interest. 
The applicant handed in the disciplinary hearing notice, the record and outcome of the hearing. The bundle was marked as “A”. 

Survey of evidence and argument
This is a brief summary of the evidence considered as provided for in terms of section 138(7)(a) of the LRA relevant to the dispute at hand.
The applicant testified in support of his case. 

Applicant’s evidence

Charles Richard Krieger (“Mr Krieger”)
Mr Krieger testified that he had a previous valid final written warning which was for misconduct relating to absence, which is not relevant to these proceedings. He testified that his dismissal was procedurally unfair because he was not afforded an opportunity to question the evidence of the respondent. On the day he was given the notice to attend the enquiry he was told that he can elect between the finance manager, the HR manager and the person who is third in charge to the chair the enquiry. He elected the finance manager. The HR manager and Mr Peter Benade, who was the complainant in the enquiry and a director of the respondent, then went outside. They returned and told him that the finance manager does not know what was going on and HR will chair the enquiry. At the enquiry it was explained that one person will speak and the other will remain silent, when he spoke he was constantly stopped and told he is saying things that is not relevant.  
[2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA) at 846
With regard to the charges levelled against him he avers that he is not guilty of bringing the company’s name into disrepute as he only made a call to the Regional Manager of Dischem (a client of the respondent) for a reference which he wanted to give to the respondent. With regard to the insubordination charge he does not understand what it means but he never showed disrespect or failed to follow an instruction. The respondent explained to him that it means that he is talking half-truths. With regard to conflict of interest he was not explained what it means. There was no evidence lead to state the trust relationship was broken between him and the respondent. 

Analysis of evidence and argument
It is trite that an arbitration is a hearing de novo. It is pertinent that the applicant was dismissed and the onus is therefore in terms of section 192 of the LRA on the respondent to prove that the dismissal of the applicant was fair. For a dismissal to be found fair, it must be affected in accordance with a fair procedure and be for a valid reason. I will first deal with the procedural fairness and thereafter with the substantive fairness. It should be highlighted that the evidence of the applicant in these proceedings is unchallenged and I must therefore accept same as the only version before me. 

Procedural fairness
The applicant testified that he, when he received the notice to attend the enquiry, was given an election between various individuals to chair the enquiry. The applicant then elected the finance manager. After the election the complainant (or initiator), Mr Peter Benade (“Mr Benade”) went outside with the HR representative Ms Nonelela Siwa (“Ms Siwa”). When they came back it was said that Ms Siwa will be chairing the enquiry. 
In Bernert v Absa Bank Ltd (CCT 37/10) [2010] ZACC 28; Bernert v ABSA Bank Ltd 2011 (4) BCLR 329 (CC); 2011 (3) SA 92 (CC) (9 December 2010) the following test for bias was highlighted at paragraph 69:

“As I have stated above, the test for bias in our law is by now settled. That test is whether a reasonable, objective and informed person would, on the correct facts, reasonably apprehend bias.”

In Ramchabi v Bureau Veritas (2014) 35 ILJ 2900 (CCMA) the Commissioner held that where the chairperson engaged in conversation with the initiator and witnesses before and after the disciplinary hearing, it would be reasonable for the employee to perceive bias. 
The unopposed facts placed before me in this arbitration persuades me to conclude that the chairperson of the hearing was not impartial and upon the facts I conclude that objectively a reasonable and informed person would apprehend bias as a result of Ms Siwa and Mr Benade talking outside the meeting and essentially, contrary to the applicant having elected the chairperson, decided that Ms Siwa will be the chairperson. 
The applicant further contended that he was not given an opportunity to ask questions, in my view whether the applicant asked questions or not is  
[2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA) at 847
  immaterial. I specifically asked the applicant whether he was afforded the opportunity to ask questions and he stated he was not. 
Based on the above reasons I, therefore, conclude that the dismissal of the applicant was procedurally unfair. 
The applicant in his support of his procedural unfairness claim also alluded to the fact that he was stopped whilst he was talking and he was told that his submissions were irrelevant. Whilst I have to accept the version of the applicant, I cannot conclude that this specific averment amounts to procedural unfairness as it may well be that the submissions (which I am not privy to what it was) may have been irrelevant. 

Substantive fairness
The applicant was dismissed for various charges. 
In Fidelity Cash Management Services v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and others [2008] 3 BLLR 197 (LAC), it was held that fairness is determined mostly on the basis of the reason for the dismissal which the employer had given at the time of the dismissal.
As per the documentation, specifically the termination of services document, the applicant was dismissed for bringing the company name into disrepute, insubordination and conflict of interest. 
With reference to the applicant’s insubordination charge, the following dicta can be used to define what insubordination is. 
In Palluci Home Depot (Pty) Ltd v Herskowitz and others (CA21/13) [2014] ZALAC 81 at paragraph 19 [also reported at [2015] 5 BLLR 484 (LAC) – Ed] the court described insubordination as follows:

“It is clear from this finding that the Labour Court failed to appreciate that the refusal to carry out an instruction is not the only basis upon which to found a charge of insubordination. The offence of insubordination in the workplace has, in this regard, been described by our courts as a wilful and serious refusal by an employee to obey a lawful and reasonable instruction or where the conduct of an employee poses a deliberate (wilful) and serious challenge to the employer’s authority. Whereas in some cases defiance of an instruction may indicate a challenge to the authority of the employer, this is not so in every case. Insubordination may also be found to be present where disrespectful conduct poses a deliberate (wilful) and serious challenge to, or defiance of the employer's authority, even where there is no indication of the giving of an instruction or defiance of an instruction. It is, therefore, not essential for an instruction to be given or disobeyed to found a challenge to the employer's authority.”

As per section 192 of the LRA the onus is on the respondent to show that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair. The only version placed before me is that of the applicant and as stated before I must accept this version as undisputed. The applicant stated that he never refused an instruction and was never disrespectful. The minutes seemed to make out an allegation of dishonesty, the applicant was however not charged with dishonesty but insubordination. In the absence of the respondent, no evidence was proffered at this arbitration illustrating the applicant being guilty. I, therefore, find the applicant not guilty.  
[2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA) at 848
With reference to the conflict of interest, there is no evidence before me to illustrate that the applicant is guilty. As stated before the onus is on the respondent to establish this, but in its absence and on the evidence from the applicant himself I cannot establish guilt. There is no evidence before me to show that the applicant entered into a relationship with the respondent’s competitors or engaged in business activities which potentially conflicted with the respondent’s business interests. The applicant is, therefore, not guilty. 
With regard to the allegation of bringing the company’s name into disrepute, the applicant submitted that he merely made a phone call to the Manager of Dischem to ask for a reference letter as he wanted to give it to Mr Renton, one of the respondent’s directors. 
As per Grogan Workplace Law paragraph 3.13 the following was used to describe the offence of bringing the company’s name into disrepute.

“Employees are required to respect, and in some cases defend, their employers’ reputation. Making statement to customers or the public calculated to damage their employers’ good name is a serious disciplinary offence. Some employers go so far as to prohibit entirely unauthorised statements to the media, and a breach of this rule is regarded as especially serious where the statement concerned puts the employer in a bad light. The rule against sullying the employer’s name may come home to roost even after an employee’s dismissal; derogatory comments by a dismissed employer about his former employer have been held to make reinstatement inappropriate, except where the comments to which the employer took exception constitute protected disclosures.”

There is no evidence tendered at the arbitration showing that the applicant damaged the respondent’s reputation or good name. In the face of no version put before me by the respondent I, therefore, have to conclude that the applicant is not guilty. 
As stated above, an arbitration is a hearing de novo, this therefore means that the respondent had to show afresh that the applicant is guilty of the charges for which he was dismissed. There is no evidence before me to illustrate the applicant’s guilt on the charges. I, accordingly, have to find that the dismissal of the applicant was substantively unfair as a result. 

Relief
The applicant in this matter seeks compensation as relief. 
In terms of the CCMA Guidelines: Misconduct Arbitrations item 130 it states that the amount of compensation must be just and equitable under the circumstances. 
I have considered various circumstances in determining what will be just and equitable. The applicant had 5 years’ service. The dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair. He is still fairly young and I am of the view that the applicant will be viable for future employment. 
Based on the above reasons, I therefore conclude that just and equitable compensation would be that of 5 months compensation.  
[2020] 8 BALR 844 (CCMA) at 849
The applicant earned a salary of R10 900 per month. Five months, therefore, amounts to R54 500.

Award 
The dismissal of the applicant, Mr Charles Richard Krieger, by the respondent, Measure for Measure, was procedurally and substantively unfair. 
The respondent, Measure for Measure, is ordered to pay the applicant, Mr Charles Richard Krieger, R54 500 (5 months) compensation for the unfair dismissal by no later than 31 January 2020. 

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document