



Food and Allied Workers Union obo Marema and others / South African Breweries (Pty) Ltd [2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration
Case No: GAEK7291-23
Date: 18/03/2025
Before: B Masote, Commissioner
Keywords


Referral in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Disciplinary procedure — Employer changing “conventional” disciplinary hearing to one based on written representations after repeated postponements — Procedure fair.
Dismissal — Substantive fairness — Employees failing to cooperate in investigation into robberies which occurred in warehouse where they worked and circumstantial evidence indicating that they must have helped the robbers — Dismissal fair.

Editor’s Summary


After this dispute was remitted by the Labour Court to the CCMA to be heard afresh by another commissioner, the 10 applicant employees, all employed at the Isando branch of the respondent (“SAB”) were invited to make written submissions why they should not be dismissed. They were found not guilty of “derivative misconduct”, but guilty of not submitting to Layered Voice Stress Analysis (“LVA”) tests, as had been recommended by forensic investigators after three robberies at the branch, which had resulted in a loss of R14m worth of goods. The employees participated in the investigation interviews, but refused to undergo the LVAs, and claimed that their dismissals were substantively and procedurally unfair. SAB contended that the employees had frustrated the disciplinary proceedings and that circumstantial evidence indicated that they must have known who the robbers were and had assisted them. 

The Commissioner noted that the employees had claimed that they had refused the LVA because the disciplinary code required a polygraph test. The evidence showed that the employees were all aware of the difference between the tests, which were both forms of truth verification. Their claim that they were entitled to undergo polygraph tests was disingenuous because they had agreed that LVA could be used after the third robbery and they could not be forced to undergo polygraph tests. The employees objected to the LVA as a way of avoiding the charge that they had not cooperated in the investigation. In short, the employees had provided no valid reason for refusing to undergo the LVA, which was chosen to assist the SAB to get to the truth behind the robberies. The employees all worked in the warehouse where the robberies had occurred and had breached the trust relationship.

 
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 611

Turning to the employees’ procedural challenge, the Commissioner noted that their main complaint was that the change from a conventional hearing to one based on written representations had deprived them of the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and make individual representations. The hearing had been protracted by “finger-pointing” and repeated postponements. The Code of Good Practice: Dismissal requires only that accused employees must be given an opportunity to “state a case”, and does not prescribe the format of hearings. The employees had been represented either by shop stewards or union officials and their written representations covered all relevant issues. The dismissal was, accordingly, procedurally fair.

The referral was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award
Details of hearing and representation

  The employees referred a dispute in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA in which they challenged the fairness of their dismissal for the allegation of misconduct. The arbitration proceedings took place at the CCMA Benoni office, Ekurhuleni Region on the dates mentioned above.

Representation of the parties was as follows
Mr Sello Kuane, the Union Official, represented 10 employees.
When the parties first appeared before me on 27 September 2023, Mr Craig Mathabatha was represented by Advocate Solly Makwabarane, and the matter was part heard. When the parties next appeared before me on 13 February 2024, Mr Gontse Hebert Leshaba attended the proceedings and introduced himself as Mr Mathabatha’s new legal representative from MM Mitti Attorneys of Edenvale.
Mr Frans Thubagale was represented by Mr Sabelo Khanya, an Attorney with Ismail and Dahya Attorneys of Boksburg.
The respondent was represented by Mr Jerry Kaapu, an Attorney with Bowman Gilfillan Inc. of Sandton.
The proceedings were manually and digitally recorded. Interpreter services were provided for the requested official languages. 
Background information 
The matter was set down for conciliation on 16 October 2018, and a certificate of non-resolution issued. The employees referred the dispute for arbitration which was scheduled for 16 November 2018. The award that was issued was successfully reviewed at the Labour Court which directed that the matter be remitted to the CCMA to be heard de novo, hence these proceedings. 
The employees were charged with the following acts of misconduct:
“Derivative Misconduct: In that, the accused employees are withholding information or know of someone who has information or 

know of someone/individuals who were involved in the break-ins/robberies that took place at Isando DC on the weekends of 21 June 2020, 10 January 2021, 29 January 2022, and 11 June 2022”.

The employees were not found guilty of Derivative Misconduct. 
5. Competent Verdict
The employees were found guilty “of breaching their duty of good faith by failing to adhere to SAB’s policies to take part in the investigation (ie: submit to the polygraph test) as they are obliged to and also concealing information about the robberies”.
Issues that are common cause
Details of the names of the employees, their dates of employment, their positions, and remunerations at the time of the dispute appear on Doc. 512 of bundle R2. The employees were dismissed on 7 July 2023.
At the time of the dispute, all the employees were Members of FAWU, and 10 were Checker/Packer Operators and 2 were Shanter Drivers at Isando Depot. 
Bundles of documents were submitted into evidence. The bundle submitted by Mr Sabelo Khanya on behalf of Mr Thubagale was marked “A1”. The bundles submitted by Mr Kuane on behalf of the 10 employees were marked “A2”–“A8”. There were no documents submitted in respect of Mr Craig Mathabathe. The documents submitted by the employer were marked “R1”–“R4”.
The disciplinary hearing held against the employees was initially conducted in a conventional manner, that is, oral and documentary evidence was presented at the selected venue. The hearing was subsequently converted into written submissions delivered by the parties. 
The employer suffered financial loss in the amount of R14 million resulting from the four robberies that took place on the dates mentioned in the charge.
After the third robbery, which took place on 29 January 2022, the employer set up an investigation, which was conducted by the Forensic Team. Part of the investigation required all the employees, contractors, suppliers, cleaners, etc, to undergo Layered Voice Stress Analysis (“LVA”), which is a truth verification instrument. 
The employees participated in the investigation interviews, but refused to undergo the LVA.
The employees challenged both the procedural and substantive fairness of their dismissal. 
As dismissal was not in dispute, I ruled that the respondent had the duty to begin to present its case. The respondent called 6 witnesses. Mr Khanye called only Mr Thubagale to testify. Mr Leshaba called only Mr Mathabathe. and Mr Kuane called 4 employees to testify.  
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 613
Parties agreed to submit written closing arguments by 13 March 2025.
Issues to be determined
Whether the dismissal of the employees was procedurally and substantively unfair?
If I find that the dismissal was unfair, I am required to award the appropriate remedy.
The employees prayed for the relief of retrospective reinstatement.
The employer prayed for the dismissal of the employees’ referral.
Procedural fairness – Mathabatha submitted as follows
The allegations contained in the suspension letter differ from those in the notice to attend the disciplinary hearing. 
The Investigator was also the Complainant/Initiator.
His application for the recusal of the Complainant/Initiator was declined by the Chairperson of the disciplinary hearing.
Further incidents were added to the allegations.
The conversion of the format of the enquiry from oral to written submissions, resulted in the employees making collective submissions, and denied them the opportunity to make individual submissions. 
Statements of the witnesses of the respondents were submitted, but he could not cross-examine the witnesses who wrote them.
Procedural fairness – Thubagale submitted as follows 
The fact that the disciplinary hearing was conducted in a collective format, did not take into consideration the circumstances of each individual employee.
Procedural fairness – FAWU (“the Union”) submitted as follows
There is a Collective Agreement (“the CA”) that regulates disciplinary processes. The processes must comply with Labour Legislation, particularly the LRA.
The reason for suspension of the employees is not clearly articulated.
It was initially agreed by the parties that individual hearings will be held, and the matter was adjourned to a new date.
On the new date, the format of the hearing was changed from the conventional manner to one that required parties to deliver written submissions. This was after the IR Manager, Mr Vuyani Fonte, wrote to the Chairperson calling for such change of format. Despite the Union taking issue with the change of the format of the hearing, the Chairperson continued in the unconventional manner of written submissions. Based on this, the Union proceeded with the hearing in the changed format under protest. 
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 614
Had the employees been informed in advanced that the hearing would proceed in the form of presenting written submissions, they would have accordingly, and properly prepared.
The Chairperson failed to conduct the hearing in a fair manner as he allowed an outsider in the name of Mr Fonte to determine how the hearing should be conducted.
The nature of the offence and value of stock lost (R14.7 million) necessitated a full-blown hearing to afford each employee the opportunity to engage the issues.
Procedural fairness – Employer submitted as follows
The employees raised several issues and frustrated the process. It was clear that the disciplinary hearing would not be concluded if it proceeded in the conventional format. To ensure that the process was concluded; it was decided that the format be changed to one of parties delivering written submissions. The process afforded all the parties a fair opportunity to engage with the issues. Accordingly, the procedure followed was fair. 
Substantive fairness – Employer submitted as follows
During the robberies mentioned above, staff was held at gunpoint and stock taken, including expensive and high valued stock.
Despite security upgrades, the robberies continued. This led to the employer believing that the robbers knew or had inside information about the security upgrades. 
The robberies were investigated, and the investigation of the third robbery included the conduct of the LVA on all employees and service providers. The employees refused to undergo the LVA. Later the employees indicated that they would participate in the investigation but would not undergo the LVA. This amounted to refusal to fully cooperate with the investigation. 
Either the employees knew who the robbers were or were working with the robbers or committed the robberies themselves. 
The robbers had information that enabled them to rob as (i) they knew about the upgraded security system, (ii) they knew where to find stock, and stock that had arrived, and (iii) they knew where expensive or high valued stock was kept.
The employees knew about the upgraded security system and where stock was kept, but they did not want to fully participate in the investigation and to subject themselves to the LVA.
Circumstantial evidence points to the employees’ involvement in the robbery of 11 June 2022 or that they knew who was involved. 
The employees breached the employer’s policy which required them to cooperate fully with any investigation conducted.
The employees were found guilty of the competent verdict, and the sanction of dismissal was appropriate.  
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 615
Substantive fairness – The employees
The employees denied the allegations against them as unfounded.
They were dismissed for refusing to undergo polygraph tests.
They were charged with derivate misconduct, which they were not found guilty of. They were found guilty of a competent verdict, despite not been given the opportunity to present evidence on it. The employer now submits that they were dismissed for not cooperating with the investigation. 
The employees contended that they were not all on the same shift when the alleged robbery that led to their dismissal took place. 
The polygraph tests should have been corroborated by direct evidence rather than circumstantial evidence.
The employees contended that they did not have advanced knowledge of the employer’s upgraded security system.
Preliminary matters
Rulings were issued granting applications for legal representation in respect of Messrs. Mathabatha & Thubagale, and the respondent. 
Analysis of evidence and argument
In making this award, I had considered the oral and documentary evidence submitted by the parties, Heads of Arguments, the Code of Good Practice: Dismissal (Schedule 8 of the LRA), CCMA Guidelines on Misconduct Arbitration, and relevant authority. 
Section 192(2) of the LRA places the onus on the employer to prove the fairness of the employees’ dismissal, both procedurally and substantively. As indicated in subparagraph 6.8 above, the employees placed procedural and substantive fairness in dispute.
The essence of the employees’ complaint about procedural fairness is that converting the disciplinary hearing from the conventional method to one requiring the parties to deliver written submissions, denied them the opportunity to state their case fully and to cross-examine the witnesses of the employer.
The employer submitted that the employees made it difficult for the hearing to proceed in a conventional manner by raising numerous irrelevant issues with the intention of frustrating the process. According to the employer, it was clear that the hearing would not be concluded. Accordingly, an alternative format of the process had to be followed to ensure that the hearing was concluded.
The employer further submitted that the employees were given full opportunity to state their case and challenge the evidence presented by the witnesses of the employer. The employees denied that they were the cause of the delay in the finalisation of the disciplinary hearing, and pointed a finger at the employer for the delay. 
It is common cause that the disciplinary hearing was convened on 24 November 2022, and by 13 April 2023, it had not yet been concluded  
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 616
  because of several issues that the parties were engaged in during the various sittings. At times, the matter did not proceed due to postponements.
It would be a futile exercise to apportion blame on which party caused the delay. However, the concern of the parties should have been to take necessary steps to expedite the finalisation of the matter, rather than finger pointing. 
The crisp issue to be determined is whether the decision taken by the employer to have the disciplinary enquiry proceed by way of written submissions by the parties, fell within the purview of procedural fairness.
Item 4 of Schedule 8 provides for the requirements of procedural fairness. Sub-item 4.1 briefly requires the employer to conduct the investigation “to determine whether there are grounds for dismissal.” The employer should notify the employee of the allegations. “The employee should be allowed the opportunity to state a case in response to the allegations,” and afforded a reasonable time to prepare, and representation by a union or fellow employee. 
It is common cause that during the disciplinary hearing, 10 of the employees, were represented by two Shop Stewards and 2 of the employees who were Shop Stewards were represented by the Union Official.
Sub-item 4.1 does not prescribe the process to be followed by the parties in presenting their versions. It only states that the employee must be afforded the opportunity to state a case in defence of the allegations.
In Avril Elizabeth Home for the Mentally Handicapped v CCMA and others (JR782/05 [2006] ZALC 44, (2006) 27 ILJ 1644 (LC); [2006] 9 BLLR 833 (LC), it was held that: “The employer was merely required to conduct an investigation, give the employee or his representative an opportunity to respond to the allegations after a reasonable period and thereafter to take a decision and give the employee notice thereof”.
The above judgment confirms procedural fairness as set out in sub-item 4.1 of Schedule 8. The judgment does not also prescribe the format of the process, that is, whether the disciplinary enquiry should be conducted conventionally or through written submissions. Of importance is to afford the parties the right and opportunity to state their case. 
The employees also raised the complaint that the employer did not accede to their request that individual hearings, rather than a group hearing, be held. 
In BEMAWUSA and others v SABC and others (J2239/2015) [2016] ZALCJHB 74; (2016) 37 ILJ 1394 (LC), the Court upheld the decision by the employer who embarked on a mass disciplinary process which was different to the standard procedure in its disciplinary code where there are exceptional circumstances such as the number of employees involved as well as operational efficiencies of the employer. Instead of appearing before the Chairperson and submitting evidence verbally, the employees may be given the allegations against them in writing to which the  
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 617
  employees could respond to and a Chairperson would then determine the issue.
Documentation submitted in this matter contains detailed written submissions presented by the parties to the Chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry in respect of the allegations brought against the employees. In my view, this confirms that the parties were given a fair opportunity to adequately address all the issues in contention. It also stands to reason that both parties were given a fair opportunity to present their versions and challenge each other’s versions in their written submissions.
The employees also raised issues relating to their suspension. I am of the view that the employees should have referred their unhappiness with their suspension in terms of section 186(2)(b) of the LRA, which concerns disputes of unfair labour practice. The suspension letter does not contain the final charge/s, but the notice of the disciplinary enquiry, does.
It is not procedurally unfair for the Investigator to be the Initiator. The fact that the Chairperson ruled against his/her recusal from the proceedings does not render the disciplinary enquiry procedurally unfair. 
Based on the above analysis, and the applicable legal principles, I accordingly find that the dismissal of the employees was procedurally fair.
With regards to substantive fairness, it is common cause that four robberies took place at the employer’s Depot in Isando on different dates, that is, 21 June 2020, 10 January 2021, 29 January 2022, and 11 June 2022, resulting in stock theft amounting in total to R14 736, 457,94. The employer presented undisputed evidence that after each robbery, security measures were upgraded.
It is common cause that the employees were not found guilty of derivative misconduct, for which they were charged as detailed in subparagraph 4.1, above. The employees were instead found guilty of the competent verdict as detailed in paragraph 5, 5.1, above, which resulted in their dismissal. This issue became contentious as the employees contended that they were found guilty of an offence (competent verdict) for which they were not charged. Accordingly, this denied them the opportunity to prepare and be able to present evidence on the competent verdict. The employer disputed this claim and contended that the parties were given the opportunity to present evidence on various aspects of the dispute, including those relating to the competent verdict.
In EOH Abantu (Pty) Ltd v CCMA and others (JA4/18) [reported at [2019] 12 BLLR 1304 (LAC) – Ed] the LAC stated in paragraph 9 that: “The Commissioner found the dismissal of an employee to be substantively unfair because he had been found guilty of an offence of gross negligence with which he had not been charged”.
In paragraph 12, the LAC stated that: “The finding of both the commissioner and Labour Court was to the effect that gross negligence and negligence were not competent verdicts on the charge and that the dismissal was substantively unfair because the element of dishonesty had not been proved”. 
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 618
In paragraph 15, the LAC stated that: “One of the key elements of fairness is that an employee must be made aware of the charges against him. However, by the same token, courts and arbitrators must not adopt a too formalistic or technical approach. The categorisation by the employer of the alleged misconduct is of less importance.”
The contention of the employees is that they were prejudiced as they were not alerted of the competent verdict on the charge sheet, and accordingly could not effectively raise a defence against it. 
This raises the question whether the employees would have conducted their defence differently or would not have had any other defence had they been alerted of the competent verdict.
The employees contended that following the robberies, they had approached and held meetings with management about the improvement of safety measures at the workplace and for management to do whatever it takes and whatever was necessary to ensure safety at the workplace. This much appeared to be common cause.
As indicated in subparagraph 6.6 above, it is common cause that after the third robbery on 29 January 2022, the employer set up an investigation, which was conducted by the Forensic Team. The investigation required all employees, contractors, suppliers, cleaners, etc, to undergo the LVA. It was not in dispute that everybody mentioned above subjected themselves to the LVA, except the employees. The employees availed themselves for the investigation interviews, and not the LVA.
This brings me to the contention between the parties on whether there is a difference between the LVA and a polygraph test. The employer contended that there is and the employees contended that the two truth verification tools are one and the same thing.
This issue arose when interviews were conducted during the investigation mentioned above. The employer referred to transcripts of the interviews where employees showed knowledge of the difference between the LVA and polygraph tools. Some employees interviewed eloquently described the polygraph test as a process where there is bodily intrusion and use of a machine, whereas, there is no bodily contact in the LVA, but verification of the truth is done over telephonic communication. This is referred to as the voice stress analysis.
The employer also referred to an undisputed trail of emails that confirmed that employees knew that the investigation required them to undergo the LVA and not the polygraph tests, and that the two are different truth verification instruments. The employer accepted that the employees could not be subjected to the polygraph tests without their consent. More especially that the parties entered into a CCMA Settlement Agreement on this issue.
During the disciplinary hearing, reference was made to the polygraph test instead of the LVA. However, as indicated above, the issue of the polygraph test was settled at the CCMA, leaving the LVA as the tool of investigation after the third robbery. 
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 619
The employees’ insistence that the LVA and polygraph tools are the same or that they were not told that the LVA will be used during the investigation, but only the polygraph test which they had the right to refuse to undergo, is disingenuous. The Chairperson of the disciplinary enquiry found that “The conduct of the employees breached their duty of good faith by failing to adhere to the employer’s policies to take part in the investigation and submitting to be tested”. Accordingly, she found the employees guilty of the competent verdict.
It is my considered view, therefore, that even if the competent verdict was not included in the charge sheet, the employees would not have had any other defence, except the false and disingenuous claim that they regarded the LVA and polygraph tools as one and the same thing. Accordingly, I have to determine whether there was a fair and valid reason to find the employees guilty and dismiss them. 
The employer relied, amongst others, on rule 4.3 of the Whistle Blower Policy (“the Policy”). There was initially a dispute whether the policy applies within the jurisdiction of the employer. However, the parties ultimately used and referred to rule 4.3 and argued on its correct application. 
Rule 4.3 provides that: “All colleagues are expected to cooperate fully and honestly with any internal investigation. Any colleague who fails to cooperate (eg by not providing complete and truthful information or intentionally provides misleading information) will be subject to disciplinary action”.
It is my view that the reason the employees initially challenged the application of rule 4.3 was the difficulty they anticipated in explaining why they refused to cooperate with the investigation fully and honestly as required by the Rule. It is evident that the employees expected to be exonerated from being subjected to the LVA, but everybody else must be subjected. I find this illogical indeed.
It is also ironic, as indicated above, that because of the robberies, the employees expressed safety concerns at the workplace and gave the employer the go ahead to do whatever is necessary to make the workplace safe. When the employer takes steps to address their concerns, they turn around and refuse to fully and honestly cooperate with the investigation for not undergoing the LVA. This raises the question, why the refusal to fully and honestly cooperate with the investigation? 
The investigation was two-fold. It involved oral interviews with all employees, contractors, suppliers, cleaners, etc. The second part involved undergoing LVA or voice stress analysis. Ms. Lalani Hilda Rautenbach, the Truth Verification Specialist, testified on the application of the LVA. The employer contended that by their refusal, the employees breached rule 4.3.
During the interviews, the employees explained that they refused to be subjected to the LVA because they did not want to risk incriminating themselves. The employer contended that the employees refused to undergo the LVA because they either knew the people who were involved in  
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 620
  the robbery or they gave the robbers inside information to be able to carry out the robbery or they were themselves involved in the robbery.
Having considered the evidence of the parties, it is my considered view that the employees failed to provide any valid reason why they refused to undergo the LVA or that exceptional circumstances existed that justified their exoneration from undergoing the LVA. It stands to reason that the employees breached rule 4.3 as they did not fully and honestly cooperate with the investigation, which was their contractual obligation to assist the employer to get to the bottom of the cause of the robberies. 
The employer was justified, in my view, considering the number of robberies that cost it to suffer financial loss of more than R14 million, to employ all necessary investigative methods to address the situation. The purpose of conducting the LVA was not a guilt finding mission, but to assist the investigation to get to the bottom of the truth and to eliminate those who passed. 
The employer had to find out, without falsely pointing fingers at anybody, who committed the robberies and how they were committed? To achieve this objective, the employer expected to get the cooperation of all who were required to do so, without which the objective would not be achieved. The employees refused to assist in this regard, thereby breaching rule 4.3 as indicated above.
At the time of the dispute, the employees were working in the warehouse where the robberies took place and where expensive liquor was kept. This clearly put the employees in the position of trust, and they were therefore expected to fully and honestly cooperate with the investigation to assist the employer to sniff out the robbers or enablers.
The Court in Woolworths (Pty) Ltd v SACCAWU and others (JA56/2016) [2017] ZALAC 54 [also reported at [2017] 12 BLLR 1217 (LAC) – Ed], laid down steps for an enquiry into a breach of a rule and held that in cases of breach of a rule, Commissioners must consider the following:
Whether there was a rule;
The nature and importance of the rule breached;
Whether the employee had knowledge of the rule or was expected to have such knowledge;
Whether the rule had been consistently applied;
Whether dismissal was the appropriate sanction.
Item 7 of Schedule 8 of the LRA sets out “Guidelines in cases of dismissal for misconduct”, which include factors referred to in the above LAC judgment for consideration by Commissioners.
It stands to reason that rule 4.3 was important in view of the nature of the business conducted by the employer, and the numerous robberies that occurred without finding the robbers. The employees had knowledge of the rule or were reasonably expected to have such knowledge as their contention was that they fully cooperated with the investigation which was not the case. 
[2025] 6 BALR 610 (CCMA) at 621
The employer also relied on Clause 4 of the Code of Business Conduct with the heading Ethical and Honest Conduct which provides that: “All AB InBev directors, officers, and colleagues must be honest, objective and diligent in the performance of their duties and responsibilities and cooperate with all internal investigations. They are trusted by the Company to exhibit professionalism in all matters pertaining to AB InBev’s affairs and not to partake in any illegal or improper activity”. 
In Autozone v DRC (MIBCO) and others [2019] 6 BLLR 551 (LAC), the Court held that: “Where misconduct reveals dishonesty and deceit, it can be accepted that an employer would lose trust in the employees. Dishonest conduct is against the interests of the employer and creates an operational problem. It was, accordingly, unnecessary for the employer to produce evidence to show that the trust relationship had been irretrievably destroyed”. [Paragraphs: 12–13.]
I therefore find, on a balance of probabilities, that the employer succeeded to discharge the onus of proving that the dismissal of the employee was substantively fair. I am satisfied, based on the above analysis, that dismissal is the appropriate sanction. 
Award 
For the reasons set out above, I find that the dismissal of the employees by the employer on 7 July 2023 was fair, both procedurally and substantively, and accordingly dismiss the employees’ referral. 
I make no order as to costs.

The following cases were referred to in the above award:


End of Document