



South African Municipal Workers Union obo Manentza v Ngwathe Local Municipality and others [2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC)
Labour Law Reports

Division: Labour Appeal Court, Johannesburg
Case No: JA56/13
Date: 24/06/2015
Before: B Waglay Judge President, DV Dlodlo and F Kathree-Setiloane Acting Judges of Appeal
Keywords


Appeal in terms of section 166 of the LRA
Bargaining council — Dispute resolution — Council may arbitrate dismissal or unfair labour practice disputes only if condonation granted for late referral — All disputes referred later than 120 days after referral of dispute for conciliation requiring condonation.
Commission for Conciliation and Mediation — Dispute resolution — Commission may arbitrate dismissal or unfair labour practice disputes only if condonation granted for late referral — All disputes referred later than 120 days after referral of dispute for conciliation requiring condonation.
Dismissal — Referral of disputes — Disputes concerning dismissals must be referred for arbitration within 90 days of referral of dispute for conciliation even if period of conciliation extended.
Dispute resolution — Time frames — Employee waiting a year for dispute to be certified unresolved, then referring dispute for arbitration — Referral out of time because 90-day period for referral of dispute for arbitration commencing 30 days after referral for conciliation.
Unfair labour practice — Referral of disputes — Disputes concerning dismissals must be referred for arbitration within 120 days of referral of dispute for conciliation even if period of conciliation extended.
Sections of the LRA considered
Section 135
Section 136
Section 191(5)(a)
Section 191(11)

Editor’s Summary


The applicant employee, then acting as a “casual” employee for the respondent municipality, applied for an advertised post, and was offered and accepted permanent employment on a particular salary grade. Thereafter, the employee was offered, and accepted, a further offer. This time, the municipality pointed out that the post had not yet been graded and that it was a condition of the fresh  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 895
offer that the employee would accept a subsequent regrading of the post, whether upwards or downwards. After the post was downgraded, the employee referred a dispute to the Bargaining Council concerning a unilateral change to his terms and conditions of employment. The municipality then indicated to the employee that it regarded the second offer as null and void, and the employee was given seven days to accept the first offer. Soon after, the municipality told the employee that he had been appointed to a post that was not on its organogram, and that he had been appointed to a post on a lower salary. The employee signed this revised offer on a “without prejudice” basis, which the municipality rejected. When the employee declined to withdraw the reservation of his rights, he was thanked for his service. The employee understood this to amount to a dismissal, and referred a dispute to the Council for conciliation. The conciliation process was extended, and the parties agreed that, depending on the outcome of further negotiations, the Council would be approached to issue a certificate of outcome. Just over two months later, a certificate was issued and the matter was referred for arbitration. At the commencement of the hearing, the municipality contended that the Council lacked jurisdiction because the referral for arbitration was late, that the employee had not been dismissed, and that the matter raised a contractual issue over which he council lacked jurisdiction. The Commissioner found that the referral was in time because it was referred within 90 days of the date on which the certificate of outcome was issued, and rejected the municipality’s other points. In review, the Labour Court dealt only with the point relating to the alleged late referral, and found that the Council indeed lacked jurisdiction because the dispute had been referred late. The appellants appealed against this finding on the ground that the referral was within 90 days of the date on which the certificate was issued, and the municipality cross-appealed against the Labour Court’s failure to pronounce on the other issues. 

Having ruled that the proper test on review was whether the Commissioner’s ruling was right or wrong, the court noted that the Council had jurisdiction to entertain the dispute as an alleged unfair labour practice because the parties fell within its registered scope. Section 191(5)(a) requires the Council to arbitrate such disputes if the Council had certified the dispute unresolved, or if 30 days have expired since the Council received the referral. The appellant contended that this provision gives employees the choice of speeding up the process by utilising the 30-day provision or waiting for a certificate to be issued. According to the appellant, this interpretation was supported by section 135(5), which requires Commissioners to certify disputes unresolved when conciliation fails or within 30 days of the referral, by section 136(1) which require the CCMA and Councils to appoint a Commissioner to resolve the dispute within 90 days of the dispute being declared unresolved, unless a delay is condoned and also by section 191(11), which likewise obliges the Labour Court to adjudicate disputes within 90 day of the date on which a certificate of outcome was issued. The Court rejected these submissions. Although section 191(5) contains a conjunctive “or”, section 191(5) entitles employees to refer disputes for arbitration or adjudication on the occurrence of either of two events: the issuing of a certificate or the expiry of 30 days after the referral. The entitlement to refer does not arise from an election by the employee, but from either of these two jurisdictional facts. Read otherwise, the issuing of a certificate more than 30 days after the referral if the parties agree to extend the conciliation would be superfluous because the right to  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 896
refer would already have accrued. The fatal flaw in the appellant’s argument was that employees do not have the choice they were alleged to have.

The Court held further that the appellant’s argument incorrectly conflated sections 191 with 135 and 136. Section 191 is designed to regulate specific disputes, while the latter provisions are of a general nature. Moreover, section 135 and 136 makes no provision for extending conciliation beyond 30 days, as did section 191(5). The latter provision expressly authorises employees to refer unfair labour practice or dismissal disputes to arbitration after the lapse of 30 days when the dispute has not been certified unresolved within that period because otherwise employees may be non-suited if conciliation is extended. The provisions of section 191, on the one hand, and section 135 and 136, on the other hand, are mutually exclusive and serve different roles in the overall scheme of the LRA. To the extent that the LAC had impermissibly grafted section 191(5) and 135 and 136 together in Fidelity Guards v Epstein and others [2000] 12 BLLR 1389 (LAC), that judgment was wrong,

The Court noted further that section 191(5) sets no specific time limit within which a dispute must be referred for arbitration after the issuing of a certificate of non-resolution or the lapse of 30 days after the referral. That omission is cured by reference to section 191(11) and to section 136(1), which require disputes to be arbitrated or adjudicated within 90 days of the date on which a certificate was certified unresolved, subject to condonation. In view of the Legislature’s intention that disputes relating to dismissals and alleged unfair labour practices should be speedily resolved, there was no reason why the same time frame should not apply to these disputes. For purposes of referrals under section 191(5(a), therefore, a reasonable time is 90 days of the date on which a certificate was issued or the expiry of 30 days after the referral, whichever is applicable. The employee had elected not to refer the dispute 90 days after lapse of the 30-day period, but had instead chosen to wait until a certificate was issued nearly a year after the dispute was referred. He had then waited a further three months before referring the dispute for arbitration. He was obliged to seek condonation, but had not done so. The Labour Court had, therefore, correctly set aside the award on that basis. Since that point was dispositive of the matter, the Court below could not be faulted for not dealing with the other points raised by the municipality.

The appeal was dismissed with no order as to costs.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Kathree-Setiloane AJA:

This matter concerns an appeal and cross-appeal against the judgment of the Labour Court (Cele J) in which it reviewed and set aside the jurisdictional ruling of the second respondent (“the arbitrator”), made under the auspices of the South African Local Government Bargaining Council (“the Bargaining Council”), on the basis that the Bargaining Council lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute because the referral was made outside the time period specified in section 191(5) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the LRA”), and the appellant failed to apply for condonation. 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 897
The appellant was employed as a casual worker by the Ngwathe Local Municipality (“the Municipality”) from June 2001, and was paid R50 per day. He was called to render services as and when required by the Municipality. On 11 March 2002, the Ngwathe Municipal Council (“the Council”) resolved that the position of Clerical Assistant: Clearance Certificate & Debt Collection is filled. On 27 March 2002, the Municipality advertised the position as a “staff vacancy”. The advertisement was signed by the Municipal Manager, Mr SK Khota (“the Municipal Manager”). It did not identify the grade of employment or the salary that the successful incumbent would receive, but it did indicate that the salary would be negotiated with the successful candidate on an individual basis.
The appellant applied for the position on 11 June 2002. He was interviewed by the Municipal Manager and, on 19 August 2002, the Council resolved to employ the appellant “Mr KI Manentza (temporary worker)” into the position of Clerical Worker Parys in the Finance Department. On 20 August 2002, the Municipal Manager issued a letter of appointment to the appellant. The appellant signed acceptance of the letter on 23 August 2002, and was appointed, on probation, for a period of six months on the R34 639 notch of the salary scale (job level 13/11). The period of termination was one month. The probation period was to commence on 1 September 2002. The Municipal Manager was expressly authorised to conclude the contract pursuant to the Council resolution of the previous day.
On 18 September 2002, the Municipal Manager issued another letter of appointment dated 20 September 2002 to the appellant. This letter of appointment replaced or substituted the previous letter of 20 August 2002. Once again, the letter recorded that the probation period would commence on 1 September 2002, but that the appellant would be employed on the R69 977 notch of the salary scale (unevaluated job level 7). The appellant accepted the revised offer on 19 September 2002. Importantly, the appellant was advised in the letter that the post level at which he had been appointed, had yet to be evaluated and that, if the evaluation required a change upwards or downwards, the appellant would be obliged to accept this condition.
On 30 October 2002, the appellant was informed by the Director: Administration that the Council had resolved that he will be appointed at job level 13/11 (in terms of the first offer). The resolution attached to another letter of appointment dated, 20 August 2002, had a space for the appellant to accept acknowledgement of the appointment and the letter. The appellant also received a salary advice on 25 October 2002 indicating that his salary would be reduced to R34 639 (as per the first letter of appointment).
It is common cause that the appellant had, at this time, been actually rendering services to the Municipality. The appellant was short-paid on the lower level and, as a result, referred a dispute concerning unilateral changes to his conditions of employment to the Bargaining Council on 8 November 2002. The chronology thereafter shows that the Municipal  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 898
  Manager had acted irregularly when he replaced the first offer. The appellant maintained the view that the Municipality was bound by the second offer. The Municipality, in turn, took the view that the second offer was null and void, but never questioned the validity of the first contract.
On 11 December 2002, the Municipality addressed another letter to the appellant indicating that the second letter, dated 18 September 2002, which substituted the letter of appointment, dated 20 August 2002, was null and void. The appellant was given seven days to indicate his acceptance of the first letter of appointment, failing which it would be assumed that “you do not accept your appointment as Clerical Assistant (Clearance Certificates and Debt Collections) at job Level 13/11 and therefore we will be left with no alternative but to terminate your employment with the Council”. 
The Municipality, thereafter, changed stance. It took the view that the position to which the appellant was appointed was not on its organogram, and it prepared another revised letter of appointment, dated 17 December 2002. It adopted this approach even though it had expressly resolved, on 19 August 2002, to approve the appointment of the appellant. In terms of the revised letter, the appellant was to be appointed from 1 September 2002 on “the R37 718 notch of the salary scale “job level 12/12)” (two levels higher than the original, but obviously lower than the second appointment grade). The appellant maintained that the second letter of appointment was valid.
On 24 December 2002, the Municipality wrote another letter to the appellant indicating to him that his appointment at job level 7 was invalid, and informing him that if he did not accept the new revised letter, he would not be allowed to tender his services and would be left without any contract of employment with the Municipality. The appellant signed the revised offer, on 30 December 2002, but annotated it with the words “sign without prejudice of right”. 
The Municipality appeared to have wrongly taken this to be a counter offer, and did not accept the annotation. It wrote to the appellant on 30 December 2002, indicating that his acceptance “without prejudice of right” was not accepted, and that if he did not sign the letter, dated 17 December 2002, without qualification, he would be left without a contract of employment from 7 January 2003. 
This led to a stand-off between the parties. The employee refused to back down from his reservation of rights, whilst the Municipality insisted on it. This then led to the letter dated 10 January 2003 in which, the Director: Administration informed the appellant that because he had not signed the revised letter of appointment, he was deemed to have rejected his appointment in terms of the Council resolution of 19 August 2002. The letter ended by thanking the appellant for his services.
The appellant treated this as a dismissal and, on 10 February 2003, referred a dispute for conciliation to the Bargaining Council. He alleged  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 899
  that he had been unfairly dismissed, and sought reinstatement. The referral to the Bargaining Council was made within the 30 day time limit for the referral of an unfair dismissal dispute in terms of section 191(1)(b)(i) of the LRA. The conciliation was set down on 3 April 2004. It was extended for a period of seven days. An agreement was signed recording this extension. The agreement indicated that depending on the outcome of the Municipality’s consultation with its principals, “the Bargaining Council will be approached for issuing the certificate of outcome”. After the lapse of seven days, the appellant requested the Bargaining Council to issue a certificate of outcome. However, instead of issuing a certificate of outcome, the Bargaining Council erroneously enrolled the matter for arbitration on 1 December 2003. A certificate of outcome was issued on 15 April 2004.
On 24 June 2004, the appellant referred the dispute to arbitration. The arbitration was set down for hearing on 29 July 2004. During the arbitration hearing, the Municipality accepted that, at all material times before the termination letter, the appellant had in fact been rendering services to the Municipality. The Municipality raised three points in limine at the arbitration in which it contended that:
The Bargaining Council lacked jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute because the referral to arbitration was late (as a result of the late issue of the certificate of outcome).
The appellant was not dismissed.
The appellant sought a declaratory order in a contractual dispute between the parties, which the Bargaining Council had no jurisdiction to arbitrate.
The arbitrator found that there was no need to apply for condonation as the certificate of outcome was issued on 15 April 2004, and the referral was made within 90 days of the date of issue of the certificate of outcome. The arbitrator relied on Sappi Timber Industries (Pty) Ltd t/a Boskor Sawmill v CCMA and others,1 in which, the Labour Court held that the delay in issuing a certificate of outcome did not result in its invalidity, and that if a party lost a right to arbitration or access to the Labour Court as a result of the delayed action of the CCMA, this would be inherently unjust. The arbitrator found that the Municipality did not question the validity of the certificate, and that the Bargaining Council could not, in any event, treat it as irregular on the basis of the judgment of this Court in Fidelity Guards Holdings (Pty) Ltd v Epstein NO and others (Fidelity Guards).2
Having summarised the background facts which led to the various letters of appointment and the parties’ respective arguments, the arbitrator found that it was common cause that the appellant was employed by the Municipality on 20 August 2002 as a Clerical Assistant. She also found that he had signed the second letter of appointment dated 18 September 2002.  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 900

  She then highlighted the text of the letter of 11 December 2002 in terms of which, the appellant was informed that if he did not accept the initial offer, the Municipality would be left with no alternative but to terminate his employment. She also drew attention to the fact that the appellant was advised in the letter dated 10 January 2003, that his services would not be required from Monday, 13 January 2003.

The arbitrator found that the appellant had in fact been rendering services to the Municipality from 20 August 2002, and that his services came to an abrupt end on 10 January 2003. She found that the contract of employment had commenced on 20 August 2002 and that the Municipality terminated the contract on 10 January 2003. She indicated that even if the letters of appointment were invalid, the appellant had been employed on a temporary basis prior to his appointment in terms of these letters and was, therefore, entitled, as a temporary worker, to protection under the LRA. She, accordingly, found that there was an employment relationship between the appellant and the Municipality and that the Municipality had dismissed him.
She rejected the contention that the appellant was shut out or locked out, and instead found that there was a dismissal, and that the Municipality was required to prove the fairness of the dismissal at the arbitration. In respect of the third point in limine, she indicated that the dispute was not about declaratory relief in a contractual matter, but that it concerned a dismissal and its fairness. She, accordingly, found that the Bargaining Council had jurisdiction to determine the fairness of the dismissal.
In the review application, the Municipality attacked all three findings of the arbitrator. The Labour Court, however, only dealt with the first issue and found that the referral to arbitration was out of time. It reasoned as follows:

“Section 191(5) of the LRA provides that if the council has certified that the dispute remains unresolved or if 30 days have expired since the council received a referral, and the dispute remains unresolved, the council must arbitrate the dispute at the request of the employee, if certain identified conditions are met. Section 191(11)(a) of the LRA prescribes a maximum period of 90 days within which a dispute must be referred to arbitration after conciliation failed to resolve it. If good cause is shown to exist where a referral is made after the expiry of the 90 days, in my view, the council may grant condonation just as this Court is specifically empowered by section 191(11)(b) to grant condonation. To hold otherwise would result in an absurdity on the face of a clearly prescribed maximum period within which a referral ought to be made to the council. Holding otherwise would render the prescribed period of 90 days nugatory. After 30 days since the council received a referral but before the lapse of 90 days, Mr Manentza was at liberty to refer the dispute for arbitration, see CAPPWAWU and others v R & B Timbers CC t/a Harding Treated Timbers. He did not. Nor did he apply for condonation for such lateness. His unexplained inactivity must have fatal consequences for his case.

. . .

I am consequently persuaded by the submission of the [Municipality] in holding that the [Bargaining Council] and therefore the [arbitrator] had no jurisdiction to arbitrate a dispute in this matter in the absence of a condonation 

 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 901

application, where the period of the delay in referring the dispute was in the region of 9 months.” [Footnote omitted.]

The appellant appeals against the judgment of the Labour Court on the basis that the arbitrator was correct in finding that there was no need for the appellant to apply for condonation because the referral to arbitration was within the 90 day time period from the date of the certificate of outcome. The Municipality cross-appeals against the failure of the Labour Court to pronounce upon the two remaining issues. In short, it is the appellant’s case that the arbitrator was correct on both remaining issues: the appellant was clearly dismissed and the true nature of the dispute was a standard unfair dismissal dispute which the Bargaining Council had jurisdiction to arbitrate.
The first ground of appeal relates to the question of whether the Bargaining Council had jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute. In a jurisdictional challenge, the test on review is simply whether the Bargaining Council had jurisdiction, on the objective facts and on the law, to arbitrate the dispute.3 Section 1914 of the LRA sets out the regulatory framework for the  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 902
  resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice disputes. Section 191(1)(a) of the LRA provides that a dispute about the fairness of a  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 903
  dismissal or a dispute about an unfair labour practice may be referred by the dismissed employee, or the employee alleging the unfair labour practice to a Bargaining Council if the parties to the dispute fall within the registered scope of the Bargaining Council, or to the CCMA if no Bargaining Council has jurisdiction. Section 191(1)(a) of the LRA, accordingly, confers jurisdiction on a Bargaining Council to resolve unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice disputes if the parties to the dispute fall within the registered scope of the Bargaining Council. 
Section 191(4) of the LRA obliges the Bargaining Council or the CCMA to attempt to resolve the dispute through conciliation. Section 191(5)(a) obliges either the Bargaining Council or the CCMA, at the request of an employee alleging any of the circumstances listed in subsections (a)(i) to (iv), to arbitrate the dispute if the Bargaining Council or a Commissioner of the CCMA has certified that the dispute remains unresolved, or if 30 days have expired since the Bargaining Council or the CCMA received the referral, and the dispute remains unresolved. Section 191(5)(a) of the LRA provides:

“If a council or a Commissioner has certified that the dispute remains unresolved or if 30 days have expired since the council or the Commission received the referral and the dispute remains unresolved –

(a) the council or the Commission must arbitrate the dispute at the request of the employee if −
the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is related to the employee’s conduct or capacity, unless paragraph (b)(iii) applies;
the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is that the employer made continued employment intolerable or the employer provided the employee with substantially less favourable conditions or circumstances at work after a transfer in terms of section 197 or 197A, unless the employee alleges that the contract of employment was terminated for a reason contemplated in section 187;
the employee does not know the reason for dismissal; or
the dispute concerns an unfair labour practice; or
(b) . . .” 
The jurisdictional question in this appeal turns on the interpretation of section 191(5) of the LRA. The appellant contends for a disjunctive interpretation of section 191(5) by virtue of the presence of the conjunctive “or” in the subsection. The appellant submits that read disjunctively, section 191(5) of the LRA gives the employee an election or choice to speed up the process by referring the dispute to arbitration after the expiry of the 30-day period, contemplated in the subsection, or wait for conciliation to take place and for a certificate to be issued. It relies in support of this interpretation of section 191(5) of the LRA on the decision of Fidelity Guards in which this Court held as follows in relation to the operation of section 191(5) of the LRA:

“It will be clear from the provisions of ss (1) to (5) of s 191 above that, when there is a dispute about the fairness of a dismissal, a certain process may be followed which ultimately leads to the resolution of such dispute either by way of arbitration or by way of adjudication. The first step in that process is 

 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 904

the referral of the dispute to a council or the CCMA for conciliation. The second is that the applicant must satisfy the CCMA or the council that a copy of the referral has been served on the other party to the dispute. Subject to s 191(5) the third step is that the council or the CCMA must attempt to resolve the dispute through conciliation. In terms of s 191(5) the Commissioner must then issue a certificate of outcome to the effect that the dispute remains unresolved or a period of 30 days must expire after the council or the CCMA received the referral. Thereafter comes the arbitration of the dispute by the council or the CCMA or the adjudication of the dispute by the Labour Court, as the case may be. The dispute is required to be referred to either a council or the CCMA within 30 days of the date of dismissal. However, if it is not referred within that period, the council or the CCMA has power to permit a late referral on good cause shown.

In my view the language employed by the legislature in s 191 is such that, where a dispute about the fairness of a dismissal has been referred to the CCMA or a council for conciliation, and, the council or Commissioner has issued a certificate in terms of s 191(5) stating that such dispute remains unresolved or where a period of 30 days has lapsed since the council or the CCMA received the referral for conciliation and the dispute remains unresolved, the council or the CCMA, as the case may be, has jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute. That the dispute may have been referred to the CCMA or council for conciliation outside the statutory period of 30 days and no application for condonation was made or one was made but no decision on it was made does not affect the jurisdiction to arbitrate as long as the certificate of outcome has not been set aside. It is the setting aside of the certificate of outcome that would render the CCMA or the council to be without the jurisdiction to arbitrate.”6

The correctness of this interpretation, it argues, is also evident from the provisions of section 191(5) which, it submits, foreshadows a pre-conciliation phase at which the parties could agree to extend the conciliation phase beyond the 30-day period (as has happened in this case). It finds support for this contention in the provisions of section 1357 of the  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 905
  LRA which makes provision for the resolution of disputes through conciliation by the CCMA.8 Section 135(1) provides that when a dispute has been referred to the CCMA (or a Bargaining Council), the CCMA must appoint a Commissioner to attempt to resolve it through conciliation. Section 135(2) of the LRA then provides that the Commissioner appointed by the CCMA must attempt to resolve the dispute through conciliation within 30 days of the date the CCMA received the referral; however the parties may agree to extend the 30-day period. Section 135(5) of the LRA provides:

“When conciliation has failed, or at the end of the 30-day period or any further period agreed between the parties –

(a) the Commissioner must issue a certificate stating whether or not the dispute has been resolved; 
(b) the Commission must serve a copy of that certificate on each party to the dispute or the person who represented a party in the conciliation proceedings; and 
(c) the Commissioner must file the original of that certificate with the Commission.”
The appellant submits that it is clear from the provisions of section 135(5) of the LRA that the conciliation phase, if extended (in terms of section 135(2) of the LRA), is brought to an end by the issuing of a certificate by the Commissioner stating whether the dispute has been resolved. It argues that the Commissioner appointed by the CCMA or a Bargaining Council to resolve the dispute is obliged in terms of section 135(5)(a) of the LRA to issue a certificate of non-resolution when conciliation has failed, or at the  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 906
  end of the 30-day period or any further period agreed between the parties. It contends in this regard that, the provisions of section 191(5) of the LRA foreshadow the possibility that the parties may have elected to extend the conciliation phase beyond the 30-day period and it, therefore, provides the employee with a choice not to refer the dispute to arbitration on the expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA, but to wait for conciliation to take place and for a certificate to be issued. This, it contends, calls for section 191(5) to be read together with the provisions of section 136(1)(a) and (b)9 of the LRA which provide that if the LRA requires a dispute to be resolved through arbitration, the CCMA must appoint a Commissioner to arbitrate that dispute if: a Commissioner has issued a certificate stating that the dispute remains unresolved; and within 90 days after the date on which that certificate was issued, any party to the dispute has requested that the dispute be resolved through arbitration. It points out that section 136(1)(b) confers the CCMA with a discretion, on good cause shown, to condone a party’s non-observance of that timeframe and allow a request for arbitration after the expiry of the 90-day period.
In addition, the appellant contends that this election is also available in section 191(11) of the LRA which provides that the referral in terms of subsection (5)(b) of a dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication, must be made within 90 days after the Bargaining Council or (as the case may be) the Commissioner of the CCMA has certified that the dispute remains unresolved. This election, it contends, is also evident from the provisions of section 64(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of the LRA, which deal with the right to strike and the recourse to lock-out. Section 64(1) provides:

“Every employee has the right to strike and every employer has recourse to lock-out if –

(a) the issue in dispute has been referred to a council or to the Commission as required by this Act, and –
a certificate stating that the dispute remains unresolved has been issued; or 
a period of 30 days, or any extension of that period agreed to between the parties to the dispute, has elapsed since the referral was received by the council or the Commission; . . .” 

  The contention thus advanced by the appellant is that these sections of the LRA make it abundantly clear that a referring party may wait for the issuing of a certificate of outcome before taking the next step and that, the Labour Court erred by not giving effect to the clear wording of the LRA.

 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 907
Accordingly, the appellant submits that it is clear from the text of section 191(5) read in the context of the LRA as a whole, that an employee is entitled to wait for a certificate to be issued before referring a dispute to the CCMA because the 90 days as provided for in section 136(1)(b) of the LRA, only starts running from the date on which the certificate of outcome is issued. It reiterates that the employee has a choice to speed up the process by referring the dispute to arbitration after the expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA, but is not obliged to do so. The purpose of section 191(5) of the LRA, it points out, is to encourage the parties to attend conciliation in an effort to resolve the dispute and, although attendance is not compulsory, the Legislature seeks to encourage the parties to achieve consensus through a conciliation process. The appellant, accordingly, contends that the referral of this unfair dismissal dispute, by the appellant to arbitration was clearly within the stipulated time period as provided for in section 136(1)(b) of the LRA and that the Labour Court erred in finding that the Bargaining Council had no jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute because it had not sought condonation.
I am unable to agree with the interpretation of section 191(5) of the LRA which the appellant contends for. Although the presence of the conjunctive “or” in section 191(5) of the LRA calls for a disjunctive reading of the provision, I disagree that it gives an employee an election to speed up the process by referring the dispute to arbitration on the expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection, or wait for conciliation to take place and for a certificate to be issued. On a proper interpretation, section 191(5) of the LRA entitles an employee to refer an unresolved unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute for arbitration to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council, in terms of subsection (a) thereof, or for adjudication to the Labour Court, in terms of subsection (b) thereof, upon the occurrence of either of two events: the issue of a certificate of non-resolution of the dispute or the expiry of the 30-day period from either the CCMA’s or the Bargaining Council’s receipt of the referral. The effect of this interpretation is that the occurrence of either of these two events entitles an employee to request the Bargaining Council concerned or the CCMA to arbitrate the dispute in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the LRA or to refer the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication in terms of section 191(5)(b) thereof. 
Section 191(5) of the LRA provides for the occurrence of either of the events: the issue of a certificate or expiry of 30 days from receipt of the referral as an objective fact which founds the employee’s right to proceed to arbitration or adjudication. The employee’s entitlement to refer the matter to arbitration or adjudication as contemplated in section 191(5)(a) and (b) of the LRA respectively, does not arise from any election on the employee’s part as contended for by the appellant, but rather from whichever of the two jurisdictional events occurs first in sequence of time. Thus, where conciliation takes place under the auspices of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council within the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA, and a certificate of non-resolution is issued within that  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 908
  period, the employee’s right to refer the dispute to arbitration or adjudication will be triggered by the issue of the certificate as the jurisdictional event conferring this right. In this case, the subsequent expiry of the 30-day period will play no role in founding the employee’s right to refer the dispute to arbitration or adjudication. 
Similarly, where the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection lapses without the holding of a conciliation proceeding and the CCMA or a Bargaining Council certifying that the dispute remains unresolved, the lapse of the 30-day period will form the jurisdictional trigger entitling the employee to refer the dispute to arbitration. This right, having accrued to the employee upon the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA will not be affected by the convening of any subsequent conciliation proceedings or the issue of a certificate of outcome consequent thereupon. As correctly pointed out by the Municipality, in the latter scenario, the issue of the certificate would have no effect in law as it would be superfluous to the employee’s right to refer the unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to arbitration since this right would have already accrued to the employee on the lapse of 30 days from the date that the CCMA or the Bargaining Council had received the referral. 
The correctness of this interpretation is aptly illustrated in two judgments of this Court, namely NUMSA v Driveline Technologies (Pty) Ltd and another (Driveline Technologies)10 and Premier of Gauteng and another v Ramabulana NO and others (Ramabulana).11 In Driveline Technologies, this Court held that:

“The [LRA] does contemplate that the Labour Court will have jurisdiction to adjudicate a dispute even when there has been no meaningful conciliation in respect of such a dispute. This is supported by the fact that section 191(5) of the Act contemplates, among others that a dispute may be referred to arbitration or adjudication if the dispute remains unresolved after a period of 30 days has lapsed since the council or the CCMA received the referral of such dispute for conciliation. Obviously, this provision was the product of past experience under the old Act.

Under the old Act our experience taught us that, without a provision such as [section 191(5) of the LRA], there could be long delays in the conciliation of disputes. All an employer would need to do in order to frustrate the process if a meeting for conciliation was a sine qua non before a dispute could be adjudicated, would be to ensure that he did not cooperate in having the conciliation meeting held.”12

Similarly, eight years later, in Ramabulana, this Court held as follows in regard to the import and meaning of section 191(5) of the LRA: 

“What the provision of section 191(5) of the [LRA] means is that two eventualities are provided for when the CCMA or a Bargaining Council has received the referral of a dismissal dispute within the prescribed period for conciliation. Either there will be attempts to conciliate or there will be no 

 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 909

attempts at conciliation within the prescribed period. It seems to me that there will be no attempts where none can be made because the one party is not present at the conciliation meeting or both are not present at the conciliation meeting and can simply not be contacted during that period. In such a case no attempts can be made. The other is where attempts can be made. Where they have been made and they have been unsuccessful, the conciliator can or must issue a certificate that the dispute remains unresolved. 

Where no attempts could be made or were made − maybe because one of the parties was out of reach or could not for some or other reason be reached, no certificate is made that the dispute remains unresolved but, once a period of 30 days from the date when the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral has lapsed, the consequence is the same. It is that the employee acquires the right to have his dispute either arbitrated if he so requests or to have it adjudicated by the Labour Court if he refers it to that Court for adjudication.

Whether the dispute goes to arbitration or adjudication depends on whether the case falls within the ambit of either section 191(5) (a) or (b) of the [LRA]. This means that a failure by the employee to attend a conciliation meeting convened pursuant to the referral of his dispute to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council for conciliation does not take away, and cannot possibly take away from him the right which section 191(5)(a) or (b) gives to him to have his dispute arbitrated if he so requests or adjudicated if he refers it to the Labour Court for adjudication.”13 

By the same token, in interpreting the similarly worded jurisdictional requirement for embarking on a protected strike in terms of section 64(1)(a) of the LRA, the Labour Court in City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality and another v SAMWU and others (Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality)14 dismissed the employer’s contention that the Commissioner’s ruling that the Bargaining Council had no jurisdiction to entertain the union’s referral of the strike issue for conciliation could serve to render the strike unprotected for its failure to comply with the requirements for a protected strike in terms of section 64(1)(a) of the LRA on the basis that:

“[I]t is not necessary under the LRA for a conciliation hearing actually to take place before a strike can be protected. In terms of section 64(1)(a) of the LRA, it is sufficient if 30 days have lapsed since the referral of the dispute. In other words, the Commissioner’s ruling affected only the convening of the conciliation process; it says no more than that the Bargaining Council did not have the jurisdiction to conciliate the dispute. Since a conciliation meeting is not a precondition for a strike to be protected (because it is sufficient that 30 days have elapsed after the date of referral), the Commissioner’s ruling is not a relevant factor.”15 

The disjunctive interpretation of section 191(5) and section 64(1)(a) of the LRA as applied by this Court in Driveline Technologies and Ramabulana and by the Labour Court in Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality respectively, is consistent with the core objective of the LRA, which is to  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 910
  provide for the speedy resolution of disputes in the workplace.16 This leaves no room for the appellant’s contention that an employee who refers an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council for arbitration or the Labour Court for adjudication, can elect which of the two events to rely upon in founding his or her right to a referral to arbitration or adjudication in terms of section 191(5)(a) or (b) of the LRA. 
It is imperative to the interpretative process to distinguish the provisions of section 191 of the LRA from those of sections 135 and 136 of the LRA thereof, in relation to their purpose in the overall scheme of the LRA. Section 191 which is found in Chapter VIII of the LRA, regulates the resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice disputes through conciliation and arbitration by a Bargaining Council with jurisdiction or the CCMA where no Bargaining Council has jurisdiction or through adjudication by the Labour Court. The purpose of section 191 is to regulate the resolution of these specific disputes by the CCMA, Bargaining Councils or the Labour Court. In comparison, the purpose of section 135 and 136 which are found in Part C Chapter VII of the LRA, is to regulate the resolution of disputes of a general nature17 referred to the CCMA in terms of section 133(1)(b)18 of the LRA and disputes about matters of mutual interest referred to the CCMA in terms of section 13419 thereof. Although the regulation of the resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice disputes is not expressly excluded from the ambit of Part C Chapter VII of the LRA, its provisions must necessarily be interpreted as impliedly excluding the resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 911
  practice disputes from its regulatory ambit, as any other interpretation, in my view, would lead to a conflict with section 191 of the LRA. 
There are marked differences between the manner in which section 191 regulates the resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour disputes and the manner in which section 135 and 136 do so, respectively. The most fundamental difference between section 191 of the LRA on the one hand, and section 135 and section 136 on the other, is that in section 191 there is no obligation as in section 135(5)20 of the LRA, on a Commissioner of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council to issue a certificate of outcome stating whether the dispute has been resolved when the conciliation has failed, or at the end of the 30 days or any further period agreed between the parties. Importantly, whilst it is implicit from section 191(5) of the LRA that the conciliation proceedings must take place prior to the lapse of 30 days from the date of receipt of the referral by the CCMA or a Bargaining Council, and that the Commissioner of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council must issue a certificate of non-resolution within this period for the certificate to form the jurisdictional foundation for the referral to arbitration or adjudication of the dispute, there is no requirement in the subsection, as in section 135(2) of the LRA, that the parties may agree to extend the 30-day period. This is because section 191(5) of the LRA contemplates that an employee will be entitled to refer his or her unresolved unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to arbitration or adjudication, on expiry of 30 days from the date that the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral. Thus any extension of this 30-day period, will effectively deny the dismissed employee or an employee alleging an unfair labour practice the right to refer his or her dispute to arbitration or adjudication on the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA.
Likewise, unlike in section 136(1) of the LRA, there is no requirement in section 191 of the LRA that the CCMA must only appoint a Commissioner to arbitrate a dispute where the Commissioner has issue a certificate stating that the dispute remains unresolved, and within 90 days after the date on which that certificate was issued, any party to the dispute has requested that the dispute be resolved through arbitration. It is also notable that whilst a request for arbitration or referral to adjudication under section 191 of the LRA may only be made by a dismissed employee or an employee alleging an unfair labour practice, a request for arbitration, under section 136 of the LRA, may be made by any party to the dispute.
Therefore, unlike in section 135(5) and section 136(1) of the LRA where the Legislature has sought to link the right of referral to arbitration to the conciliation process by obliging the Commissioner when the conciliation has failed, or at the end of the 30-day period or any further period agreed between the parties to issue a certificate stating whether the dispute has been resolved and by requiring that such certificate be issued before a  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 912
  Commissioner is appointed to arbitrate the dispute, the provisions of section 191 of the LRA contain no such requirements. Nor has the Legislature in section 191 of the LRA sought to link the validity of the referral to arbitration and the jurisdiction of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council to arbitrate the dispute to the certificate of outcome of the conciliation. This is because section 191(5) of the LRA contemplates that the CCMA or a Bargaining Council will have jurisdiction to arbitrate an unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice dispute on the lapse of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral, regardless of whether a certificate of non-resolution has been issued by the CCMA or the Bargaining Council concerned. 
Thus, unlike under section 136 of the LRA, the issue of a certificate of non-resolution does not found the right of referral to arbitration or adjudication under section 191(5) of the LRA, as the subsection confers this right upon the lapsing of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection regardless of whether conciliation21 actually takes place or a certificate of non-resolution is issued by the CCMA or the Bargaining Council concerned. It follows that neither the holding of an actual conciliation nor the issue of a certificate of non-resolution by the CCMA or the Bargaining Council concerned, is a prerequisite for purposes of referring an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to arbitration or adjudication in terms of section 191(5)(a) and (b) of the LRA, where there has been a lapse of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral and the dispute remains unresolved.22 
The provisions of section 191 of the LRA on the one hand, and those of sections 135 and 136 on the other, are mutually exclusive. Put differently, they do not and quite simply cannot both regulate the process to be followed by a dismissed employee or an employee alleging an unfair labour practice when referring his or her dispute to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council for conciliation and arbitration or the Labour Court for adjudication, as this would surely lead to a conflict between them. As demonstrated, they serve distinct roles and objectives in the overall scheme of the LRA. Sections 135 and 136 of the LRA, therefore, have no application to the resolution of unfair dismissal and unfair labour practice dispute under the LRA. The appellant’s reliance on sections 135(5) and 136(1)(a) and (b) of the LRA in support of its interpretation of section 191(5) of the LRA, as providing the employee with a choice to refer the dispute to arbitration or adjudication on the lapse of the period of 30 days as contemplated in the subsection, or await the outcome of the conciliation process and the issue of a certificate of outcome is entirely misplaced. 
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 913
Whilst conceding that an employee acquires a right in terms of section 191(5) of the LRA to proceed to arbitration on the expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection without the issue of a certificate of outcome, the appellant contends that the employee is entitled to elect not to do so and to await the conciliation and the issue of a certificate consequent thereupon, before referring the dispute to arbitration because the 90 days contemplated in section 136(1)(b) of the LRA, will only start running when the certificate is issued. The appellant contends that in so electing, the issue of a certificate is then a pre-requisite for referring the matter to arbitration. I disagree for two primary reasons. First because as demonstrated above, section 136 of the LRA has no application to the process that an employee is required to follow when referring an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council for conciliation and arbitration or, the Labour Court for adjudication and second, whilst it is open to the employee to elect not to proceed to arbitration, and to await the outcome of the conciliation proceedings, since section 191(5) of the LRA contains no bar to doing so, the flaw in the appellant’s argument lies in its erroneous premise that where the 30-day period has lapsed and the employee elects to await the outcome of conciliation prior to referring the matter to arbitration − an election not envisaged in the provisions of section 191(5) of the LRA − he or she would then require a certificate of outcome to enable him to proceed to arbitration.
I repeat, that upon the 30-day period expiring prior to the issue of a certificate of outcome, the issue of a certificate is not required to found the employee’s right of referral of the dispute to arbitration or adjudication. As alluded to above, the issue of a certificate of non-resolution is not a pre-requisite for a referral to arbitration or adjudication in these circumstances since the right of referral would have already accrued to the employee on expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection. To my mind, the issue of a certificate of outcome following such accrual, would be superfluous to the employee’s right of referral to arbitration, as would be the holding of conciliation proceedings, pursuant to which such certificate is issued, since section 191 of the LRA does not envisage that on the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in subsection (5), a further attempt at conciliation should be made. Thus, the subsequent holding of conciliation proceedings will have no impact upon the employee’s right to refer his or her dispute to arbitration or adjudication on the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA. 
The appellant also relies on the decision of this Court in Fidelity Guards in support of its interpretation of section 191(5) of the LRA. I am of the view that such reliance is equally misplaced because, as will be illustrated below, the decision is wrong. Fidelity Guards concerned an appeal against a dismissal of a review application in which, one of the grounds of contention was that the arbitrator lacked jurisdiction to hear the dispute as the conciliation proceedings were invalid due to the employee’s failure to apply for condonation for the late referral of the dispute for conciliation outside the statutory period of 30 days for an unfair dismissal dispute in  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 914
  terms of section 191(1)(b)(i) of the LRA. The Court held that the fact that a dispute is referred to the CCMA or a Bargaining Council for conciliation outside the statutory period of 30 days, and no application for condonation is made or one is made but no decision on it is made, would not affect the jurisdiction of the CCMA or the Bargaining Council concerned to arbitrate the dispute, provided the certificate of outcome has not been set aside. It is the setting aside of the certificate of the outcome, the Court held, that would render the CCMA or the Bargaining Council concerned to be without jurisdiction to arbitrate.23 
In arriving at this conclusion, the Court appears to have impermissibly grafted the provisions of sections 135 and 136(1)(a) and (b) of the LRA onto the referral, by an employee, of his unfair dismissal dispute to the CCMA for conciliation and arbitration24 which, as demonstrated above, is regulated exclusively by section 191 of the LRA. Having gone astray in this respect, the Court then, erroneously, proceeded to link the setting aside of the certificate of outcome to the jurisdiction of the CCMA or Bargaining Council to arbitrate an unfair dismissal dispute. As alluded to above, the jurisdiction of the CCMA or Bargaining Council to arbitrate an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute is not conditional upon the issue of a certificate of outcome, as an employee’s right of referral to arbitration accrues on the lapse of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral, and the dispute remains unresolved. 
Whilst the issue of a certificate of outcome by a Commissioner of the CCMA or Bargaining Council may found the right of referral of an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute to arbitration or adjudication prior to the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA, as the right of referral accrues on the issue of such certificate and is, consequently, a pre-requisite for a referral to arbitration or adjudication in those circumstances only, the subsection does not impose an obligation on a Commissioner of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council to issue a certificate of outcome on the lapse of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral, and the dispute remains unresolved. Since the issue of a certificate of non-resolution by the CCMA or a Bargaining Council concerned, is not a pre-requisite for a referral to arbitration in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the LRA, it cannot, in my view, cure the lack of jurisdiction of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council to arbitrate an unresolved unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute, where such certificate is issued after the elapse of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral, and the employee has not sought condonation for its non-observance of that timeframe.  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 915
It is thus evident from the general scheme of section 191(5) of LRA that either of the two events: the issue of a certificate of non-resolution by a Commissioner of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council or the expiry of 30 days from the date on which the CCMA or Bargaining Council received the referral and the dispute remains unresolved, entitles an employee to request arbitration or adjudication. Section 191 of the LRA is, however, silent, on the time period within which the referral to arbitration is to be made from the date of the happening of either of the two events referred to in subsection (5) of the LRA. Since section 191 of the LRA does not prescribe the specific time period within which an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice is to be referred to arbitration in terms of subsection (5)(a) of the LRA, the dismissed employee or the employee alleging an unfair labour practice must refer such dispute to arbitration within a reasonable period of time.25
What would constitute a reasonable period of time in respect of a referral to arbitration, in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the LRA may, to my mind, be decided with reference to section 191(11) of the LRA which provides in relation to the referral of a dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication in terms of subsection (5)(b) of the LRA, that such referral must be made within 90 days after the Commissioner of the CCMA or a Bargaining Council has certified that the dispute remains unresolved. Although not applicable to the referral to arbitration of an unfair dismissal or unfair labour practice dispute under the LRA, due regard may also be had to section 136(1)(a) and (b) of the LRA, which provide that the CCMA may only appoint a Commissioner to arbitrate a dispute, which the LRA requires to be resolved through arbitration, if a Commissioner has issued a certificate stating that the dispute remains unresolved, or within 90 days after the date on which the certificate was issued, any party to the dispute has requested that the dispute be resolved. Both the CCMA under section 136(1)(b) of the LRA, and the Labour Court, under section 191(11) of the LRA are, however, afforded a discretion to condone a party’s non-observance of the 90 day time-frame, and allow a request for arbitration or adjudication (as the case may be) after the expiry of the 90 day period. 
In view of the legislative objective of expediting the resolution of employment disputes through the effective and timeous utilisation of the dispute resolution machinery created by the LRA, I see no reason why a different standard should be applied to the referral of disputes to arbitration in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the LRA.26 Thus, a reasonable time within which a referral to arbitration in terms of section 191(5)(a) of the LRA should be made would be 90 days from the date of whichever of  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 916
  these two events occurs first: (a) the issue of the certificate of non-resolution by the CCMA or a Bargaining Council; or (b) the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection. Accordingly, the appellant was required to refer his unfair dismissal dispute to the Bargaining Council for arbitration within 90 days from the lapse of the 30-day period contemplated in section 191(5) of the LRA. 
The appellant referred his unfair dismissal dispute to the Bargaining Council for conciliation on or about 10 February 2003. In terms of section 191(5) of the LRA, he acquired the right to refer his unfair dismissal dispute to arbitration on 12 March 2003 upon the expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection. The appellant, however, elected not to refer the dispute to arbitration at that stage, but rather to await the outcome of the conciliation process (which ensued on 3 April 2003) and the issue of a certificate of outcome following thereupon. In the event, the certificate of non-resolution was only issued on 15 April 2004, a full year after the conciliation took place, following which the appellant referred the matter to arbitration on 24 June 2004, being more than 13 months after he acquired the right to refer the dispute to arbitration (on 12 March 2003), upon expiry of the 30-day period contemplated in the subsection. Thus, in so far as he chose to await the outcome of the conciliation process and the issue of a certificate of outcome by the Bargaining Council, before referring the dispute to arbitration, the appellant was obliged to seek condonation from the arbitrator for his failure to refer the dispute to arbitration within 90 days of the date of expiry of 30 days from the date that the Bargaining Council had received the referral. 
The appellant was, consequently, required to refer his unfair dismissal dispute to arbitration within 90 days of 12 March 2003, which was no later than 10 June 2003. The appellant, however, only referred his unfair dismissal dispute to arbitration more than 12 months after the referral was due on 24 June 2004, but failed to seek condonation, from the Bargaining Council for this inordinate delay. The arbitrator, accordingly, erred in finding that the Bargaining Council had jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute. I, accordingly, consider the setting aside of the arbitration award by the Labour Court to have been properly and correctly made, on the grounds that the referral to arbitration was lodged substantially more than 90 days after the lapse of 30 days from the date on which the Bargaining Council had received the referral for conciliation, and in the absence of an order condoning the delay, the Bargaining Council had no jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute.
The finding of this Court on the jurisdictional issue is dispositive of the issues on appeal and cross-appeal. Accordingly, the Labour Court did not err in failing to decide the remaining issues in the review. For the same reason, it is not necessary for this Court to determine the issues in the cross-appeal. In the premises, I find that the arbitration award was correctly reviewed and set aside by the Labour Court. The appeal, therefore, falls to be dismissed. 
Since the appeal concerns issues concerning the interpretation of key dispute resolution provisions of the LRA, and that it is manifestly in the  
[2015] 9 BLLR 894 (LAC) at 917
  public interest that interpretative clarity be sought on appeal, the Municipality does not seek a costs order against the appellant. I see no reason in law or equity to adopt a contrary approach to the issue of costs. 
In the result, I make the following order:

“The appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.”

(Waglay JP and Dlodlo AJA concurred in the judgment of Kathree-Setiloane AJA.)

The following cases were referred to in the above judgment:


Footnotes
1	  (2003) 24 ILJ 846 (LC) [also reported at [2003] JOL 10754 (LC) – Ed]. 
2	  (2000) 21 ILJ 2382 (LAC) at para [12] [also reported at [2000] 12 BLLR 1389 (LAC) – Ed].
3	 SA Rugby Players’ Association (SARPA) and others v SA Rugby (Pty) Ltd and others; SA Rugby (Pty) Ltd v SARPU and another [2008] 9 BLLR 845 (LAC).
4	  S 191 of the LRA provides:
 “(1) (a) If there is a dispute about the fairness of a dismissal, or a dispute about an unfair labour practice, the dismissed employee or the employee alleging the unfair labour practice may refer the dispute in writing to –
 (i) a council if the parties to the dispute fall within the registered scope of that council or
 (ii) the Commission, if no council has jurisdiction.
  (b) A referral in terms of paragraph (a) must be made within –
 (i) 30 days of the date of a dismissal or, if it is a later date within 30 days of the employer making a final decision to dismiss or uphold the dismissal; 
 (ii) 90 days of the date of the act or omission which allegedly constitutes the unfair labour practice or, if it is a later date, within 90 days of the date on which the employee became aware of the act or occurrence.
 (2) If the employee shows good cause at any time, the council or the Commission may permit the employee to refer the dispute after the relevant time limit in subsection (1) has expired.
 (2A) Subject to subsections (1) and (2), an employee whose contract of employment is terminated by notice, may refer the dispute to the council or the Commission once the employee has received that notice.
 (3) The employee must satisfy the council or the Commission that a copy of the referral has been served on the employer.
 (4) The council or the Commission must attempt to resolve the dispute through conciliation.
 (5) If a council or a Commissioner has certified that the dispute remains unresolved, or if 30 days have expired since the council or the Commission received the referral and the dispute remains
  (a) unresolved –
 (i) the council or the Commission must arbitrate the dispute at the request of the employee if –
 (ii) the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is related to the employee’s conduct or capacity unless paragraph (b)(ii) applies;
 	 (iii) the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is that the employer made continued employment intolerable or the employer provided the employee with substantially less favourable conditions or circumstances at work after a transfer in terms of section 197 or 197A, unless the employee alleges that the contract of employment was terminated for a reason contemplated in section 187;
 (iv) the employee does not know the reason for the dismissal; or 
  (b) the dispute concerns an unfair labour practice; or 
 (i) the employee may refer the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication if the employee has alleged that the reason for dismissal is−
 (ii) automatically unfair; 
 (iii) based on the employer’s operational requirements ; 
 (iv) the employee’s participation in a strike that does not comply with the provisions of Chapter IV; or 
 (v) because the employee refused to join, was refused membership of or was expelled from a trade union party to a closed shop agreement.
 (5A) Despite any other provisions in the Act, the council or Commission must commence the arbitration immediately after certifying that the dispute remains unresolved if the dispute concerns –
  (a) the dismissal of an employee for any reason relating to probation; 
  (b) any unfair labour practice relating to probation; 
  (c) any other dispute contemplated in subsection (5)(a) in respect of which no party has objected to the matter being dealt with in terms of this subsection.
 (6) Despite subsection (5)(a) or (5A), the director must refer the dispute to the Labour Court, if the director decides, on application by any party to the dispute, that to be appropriate after considering –
  (a) the reason for the dismissal; 
  (b) whether there are questions of law raised by the dispute; 
  (c) the complexity of the dispute; 
  (d) whether there are conflicting arbitration awards that need to be resolved; 
  (e) the public interest.
 (7) When considering whether the dispute should be referred to the Labour Court, the director must give the parties to the dispute and the Commissioner who attempted to conciliate the dispute, an opportunity to make representations.
 (8) The director must notify the parties of the decision and refer the dispute –
  (a) to the Commission for arbitration; or
  (b) to the Labour Court for adjudication.
 (9) The director’s decision is final and binding.
 (10) No person may apply to any court of law to review the director’s decision until the dispute has been arbitrated or adjudicated, as the case may be.
 (11) (a) The referral, in terms of subsection (5)(b), of a dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication, must be made within 90 days after the council or (as the case may be) the commission has certified that the dispute remains unresolved.
  (b) However, the Labour Court may condone non-observance of that time frame on good cause shown.
 (12) If an employee is dismissed by reason of the employer’s operational requirements following a consultation procedure in terms of section 189 that applied to that employee only, the employee may elect to refer the dispute either to arbitration or to the Labour Court.
 (13) (a) An employee may refer a dispute concerning an alleged unfair labour practice to the Labour Court for adjudication if the employee has alleged that the employee has been subjected to an occupational detriment by the employer in contravention of section 3 of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000, for having made a protected disclosure defined in that Act.
  (b) A referral in terms of paragraph (a) is deemed to be made in terms of subsection (5)(b).”
6	  At paras [11] and [12].
7	  S 135 of the LRA provides:
 “(1) When a dispute has been referred to the Commission, the Commission must appoint a Commissioner to attempt to resolve it through conciliation.
 (2) The appointed Commissioner must attempt to resolve the dispute through conciliation within 30 days of the date the Commission received the referral: However the parties may agree to extend the 30-day period.
 (3) The Commissioner must determine a process to attempt to resolve the dispute, which may include –
  (a) mediating the dispute;
  (b) conducting a fact-finding exercise; and
  (c) making a recommendation to the parties, which may be in the form of an advisory arbitration award.
 (3A) If a single Commissioner has been appointed, in terms of subsection (1), in respect of more than one dispute involving the same parties, that Commissioner may consolidate the conciliation proceedings so that all the disputes concerned may be dealt with in the same proceedings.
  [Sub-s.(3A) inserted by s.8(a) of Act 127 of 1998]
 (4) . . .
  [Sub-s. (4) substituted by s.8(b) of Act 127 of 1998 and deleted by s. 26 of Act 12 of 2002]
8	  The provisions of ss 133–150, which are found in Ch VII, Part C of the LRA apply to the resolution of disputes under the auspices of the CCMA. They also apply to accredited Bargaining Councils which have received accreditation from the Governing Body of the CCMA pursuant to s 127(6) of the LRA which provides:
“The terms of accreditation must state the extent to which the provisions of each section in Part C of this Chapter [reference to Chapter VII] apply to the accredited council or accredited agency.”
9	  S 136(1) of the LRA provides: 
“If this Act requires a dispute to be resolved through arbitration, the Commission must appoint a Commissioner to arbitrate that dispute if −
 (a) a Commissioner has issued a certificate stating that the dispute remains unresolved; and 
 (b) within 90 days after the date on which that certificate was issued; any party to the dispute has requested that the dispute be resolved through arbitration. However, the Commission, on good cause shown, may condone a party’s non-observance of the time-frame and allow a request for arbitration filed by the party after the expiry of the 90-day period.”
10	  [2000] 1 BLLR 20 (LAC). 
11	  [2008] 4 BLLR 299 (LAC). 
12	  At paras [66] and [67].
13	  At paras [11]–[13]. 
14	  [2011] 7 BLLR 663 (LC). 
15	  At para [15].
16	 Gcaba v Minister for Safety and Security and others 2010 (1) SA 238 (CC) at para [1] [also reported at [2009] 12 BLLR 1145 (CC) – Ed].
17	 NUM v Hernic Exploration (Pty) Ltd [2001] 2 BLLR 209 (LC) at para [11]. 
18	  S 133 of the LRA provides:
 “(1) The Commission must appoint a Commissioner to attempt to resolve through conciliation –
 (a) any dispute referred to it in terms of section 134; and 
 (b) any dispute that has been referred to it in terms of this Act.
 (2) If a dispute remains unresolved after conciliation, the Commission must arbitrate the dispute if –
 (a) this Act requires the dispute to be arbitrated and any party to the dispute has requested that the dispute be resolved through arbitration; or 
 (b) all the parties to the dispute in respect of which the Labour Court has jurisdiction consent in writing to arbitration under the auspices of the Commission.”
19	  S 134 of the LRA provides:
 “(1) Any party to a dispute about a matter of mutual interest may refer the dispute in writing to the Commission, if the parties to the dispute are –
 (a) on the one side –
 (i) one or more trade unions
 (ii) one or more employees; or 
 (iii) one or more trade unions and one or more employees; and
 (b) on the other side –
 (i) one or more employers’ organizations; 
 (ii) one or more employers; or
 (iii) one or more employers’ organizations and one or more employers.
 (2) The party who refers the dispute to the Commission must satisfy it that a copy of the referral has been served on all the other parties to the dispute.”
20	 See s 135(5) of the LRA.
21	 Driveline Technologies at paras [66] and [67] and Ramabulana at paras [11]–[13].
22	  Although the actual convening of a conciliation is not required under s 191(5) for the dispute to be referred to arbitration within the 30-day period, contemplated in the subsection, the dismissed employee or employee alleging an unfair labour practice is obliged in terms of s 191(1)(a) and (b) of the LRA to refer the matter to a Bargaining Council with jurisdiction, or to the CCMA, where no Bargaining Council has jurisdiction, for conciliation.
23	 Fidelity Guards at paras [11] and [12].
24	  In paras [9] and [10] of the judgment, the Court made specific reference to the relevance of ss 135(5) and 136(1)(a) and (b) of the LRA to the referral, in terms of s 191(5) of the LRA, of the unfair dismissal dispute in question to conciliation and arbitration. 
25	  Wolgroeiers Afslaers (Edms) Bpk v Munisipaliteit van Kaapstad 1978 (1) SA 13 (A) at 398A–B [also reported at [1978] 1 All SA 369 (A) – Ed]; JDG Trading (Pty) Ltd t/a Bradlow’s Furnishers v Lake NO and others (2001) 22 ILJ 641 (LAC) [also reported at [2001] 3 BLLR 294 (LAC) – Ed]; Vorster v Rednave Enterprises CC t/a Cash Converters Queenswood (2009) 30 ILJ 407 (LC) at 411A–B [also reported at [2008] 11 BLLR 1111 (LC) – Ed].
26	 Sappi Timber Industries (Pty) Ltd t/a Boskor Sawmill v Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and others (2003) 24 ILJ 846 (LC) [also reported at [2003] JOL 10754 (LC) – Ed].

For the appellant:
FA Boda SC instructed by Cheadle Thompson & Haysom
For the first respondent:
MH Marcus instructed by Lebea & Associates


End of Document