



Gama / Checkers Hyper [2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA)
Arbitration Law Reports

Division: CCMA, Johannesburg
Case No: GAJB 9890-06
Date: 04/09/2006
Before: R Hlongwane, Commissioner (CCMA)
Keywords


Application in terms of section 191(5)(a)(i) of the LRA
Dismissal: Substantive fairness — Whistle blowing — Employee making false allegations about employer to Department of Labour — Dismissal fair.
Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 — Scope — Act not protecting untrue disclosures about employer made in bad faith. 

Editor’s Summary


The applicant, a cashier with six years’ service, was dismissed for giving false information to the Department of Labour (“DOL”). She claimed that she was aggrieved when the respondent declined to pay her for sick leave recommended by a traditional healer, and that she had reported the matter to a shop steward. She said that she had later completed a DOL form with a number of other employees, and that the submission of complaints to the department constituted a “protected disclosure”.

The commissioner held that the applicant had approached the DOL alone and had made a number of untrue allegations about the respondent in bad faith. Such conduct was not protected by the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000.

The application was dismissed.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Award

Details of hearing and representation

This arbitration was held in terms of section 191(1)(5)(a) of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 as amended on 14 August 2006 at 2pm at the CCMA offices in Johannesburg. The applicant (“True-Love, Thembi Gama”) appeared and was represented by Mr Obed Sithole, a union organiser, whilst Mr Yaseen Dadabhay, manager appeared for and on behalf of the respondent party (“Checkers Hyper”). 

These proceedings were electronically recorded and by means of hand-written notes. The parties agreed to submit their heads of arguments in writing.

Issues to be decided

•I am required to determine whether the applicant’s dismissal on 3 April 2006 for alleged misconduct was procedurally and substantively fair.

•If not, I must determine an appropriate relief.

 
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 275

Background to the matter

The applicant had been in the employ of the respondent since 9 November 1999. At the time of termination of her services, she was employed as a cashier earning a basic salary of R208 per week.

After what she considered to be an unfair dismissal, she referred a dispute to the CCMA. The matter was conciliated on 25 May 2006 and a certificate of non-resolution was issued.

The matter was properly referred to arbitration.

At the commencement of these proceedings, the respondent accepted the existence of dismissal and the onus to prove the fairness of dismissal as required in terms of section 192(2) of the LRA 66 of 1995 as amended. 

Survey of evidence and arguments

The respondent’s case

The respondent in this matter is Checkers Hyper. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the applicant was charged and dismissed for the following misconduct;

“Bringing the company’s name into disrepute by giving false information to Labour Department.”


It was the respondent’s submission that the dismissal was instituted procedurally and substantively fair.

The respondent presented a bundle of documents and led the evidence of one witness. The respondent accordingly prays for the dismissal of this matter.

Evidence in chief

Andre Andrews; 1st witness

Mr Andrews testified that he is currently employed as a branch manager and has been in the employ of the respondent for the past nine years. 

The witness confirmed that the applicant worked as a cashier at his branch. The witness submitted that as a manager he has an open-door policy and he always interacts with shop stewards in relation to workplace issues. It was the witness’s testimony that in terms of the company procedures, employees are required to address their grievances via the shop stewards.

The witness submitted that on or about August 2005 the applicant went on sick leave, and upon her return, she presented a sick note from a traditional healer, which the respondent did not accept because it was not from a registered traditional healer. It was the witness’s testimony that when the applicant complained that she was not paid for the sick leave, he then gave her a copy of the company policy on sick leave marked exhibit 16. According to the witness, the applicant did not accept the policy. 

It was the witness’s testimony that the applicant informed other employees that she has been badly treated. She then approached the Department of Labour (“DOL”) and made serious allegations against the company. The witness referred to the applicant’s letter of complaint to DOL marked exhibit 4–5. The witness testified that an inspector (William) from DOL visited the store as part  
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 276
of the investigation, but he could not find anything wrong with the company policies, practices and procedures. According to the witness, after the applicant was given the outcome of the investigation, she approached another inspector, and when the second inspector was given the initial outcome, she did not continue with the investigation. The witness presented the following testimony in respect of the applicant’s complaints stipulated on exhibit 5: 

“No pay-slip received, we found the copies sometimes no lunch especially month end, and no money for that.”


Mr Andrews testified that exhibit 22 is proof that the applicant received payslips: 

“They don’t want to give us leave”


The witness submitted that exhibit 17–20 is proof that annual leave was granted:

“No payment for sick leave, maybe they did sometimes if they want.”


The witness submitted that paid sick leave is conditional to the submission of a valid sick note, and from a registered professional healer: 

“No double payment for Sundays.”


It was the witness’s submission that the applicant was not entitled to double pay on Sundays, as she was employed on a 40 hour part-time contract, as stipulated on paragraph 4.2 of the part-time contract agreement marked exhibit 6. 

The witness submitted that the applicant was asked why she did not first complain to her shop stewards, but she failed to provide an explanation. The witness confirmed that the applicant was issued with a notice of disciplinary inquiry marked exhibit 1, which stipulated her rights and the alleged misconduct. According to the witness, during the hearing held on 30 March 2006 the applicant did not call witnesses or give evidence. It was the witness’s testimony that he drafted the minutes and the applicant signed them. 

It was the witness’s testimony that Bethuel (shop steward) disputed at the hearing that the applicant informed him about her intention to report her complaint to the DOL. The witness indicated that Bethuel confirmed that the applicant complained about her sick leave pay. It was the witness’s submission that the applicant breached the protocol of reporting her complaint to the shop steward, like other employees do. 

Cross-examination

It was the witness’s testimony that the admin manager investigated the matter and also acted as the complainant at the hearing. The witness indicated that he chaired the disciplinary hearing. The witness submitted that the applicant did not supply sufficient mitigating factors when afforded the opportunity to do so. The witness conceded that the charge of misconduct does not specify the date. The witness submitted that the applicant signed the minutes as confirmation that they are correct. It was the witness’s submission that he explained to the applicant that her sick note is not recognised in terms of the company policy. The witness confirmed that the company did not contact the traditional healer in question. 

Mr Andrews submitted that he is not aware of other employees who signed the complaint’s form to the DOL. 

 
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 277

The applicant’s case

The applicant in this matter is True-Love, Thembi Gama. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the termination of her services was procedurally and substantively unfair.

The applicant testified as the only witness. She presented no bundle of documents in support of her case.

The applicant accordingly prays for the retrospective reinstatement as a relief for unfair dismissal. 

Evidence in chief

The applicant submitted that she disputes the alleged misconduct leveled against her and for which she was dismissed. The applicant testified that on 9 November 2005 she consulted a traditional doctor due to illness. She testified that when she reported for duty, she presented a sick note to her supervisor, who handed it to the manager (Ms Karib). The applicant submitted that she was subsequently informed that personnel declined the sick note because it is from a traditional healer, and she was told that she will not be entitled to paid sick leave. 

According to the applicant, she approached her shop steward (Sidney) and laid a complaint with him. It was the applicant’s testimony that she kept the sick note, hoping that the shop steward would assist her in resolving the problem. She submitted that on 02 February 2006 she decided to approach the Department of Labour, because she had lost hope over the internal procedures. According to the applicant, the DOL then asked her several questions, but she took the form back to the workplace to discuss with other employees. 

She testified that together with other employees, they completed the complaint form marked exhibit 4 & 5. She indicated that she did not answer the questions alone as an individual, but other employees also contributed in answering the questions and they signed on the backside of the form. 

It was the applicant’s testimony that labour inspectors did not speak to her, and she was not aware that they visited the store. The applicant submitted that she did not instigate other employees to sign the complaint form. It was her submission that she was the only one charged with misconduct and dismissed. 

Cross-examination

The applicant conceded that she did sign the contract of employment marked exhibit 6–12. The applicant further conceded that she took leave about three times. The applicant conceded that she did receive leave pay. She submitted that she delayed in lodging a complaint because she wanted to give the company adequate opportunity to try and sort out the problem. 

It was her submission that she approached the DOL because she felt it was unfair that her sick note was declined and she was not afforded paid sick leave. The applicant indicated that paragraph 5 on exhibit 5 was meant to indicate that they do not receive full annual leave. She submitted that when she initially lodged the complaint, she was asked about other issues pertaining to the working environment. 

 
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 278

It was the applicant’s submission that she first lodged the problem internally, in that she first spoke to the supervisor, then to the manager, then to personnel and finally to her shop steward, but all in vain. 

Analysis of evidence and arguments

The issue in dispute is whether the applicant’s disclosure of workplace issues stipulated in the complaints form marked exhibit 4 & 5 to the Department of Labour constituted gross misconduct warranting summary dismissal or was it a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 (“the Act”).

In terms of section 192(2) of the LRA 66 of 1995, the employer bears the onus to prove the fairness of dismissal. This burden of proof must be discharged on a balance of probabilities, in that the respondent’s version regarding the alleged misconduct must be plausible and reasonably probable. 

Factual findings 

It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the applicant made false allegations against the respondent to the DOL and that these allegations brought the respondent’s name into disrepute. It was further submitted that the applicant ignored the internal operating procedures in terms of first reporting her grievances to the shop stewards and management. It was contended on behalf of the applicant that she made a protected disclosure to the DOL and that her subsequent dismissal constitutes an occupational detriment in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000.

It was further contended that the dismissal was unfair, in that only the applicant was dismissed, yet this was a collective complaint involving other employees. It is common cause that the applicant individually approached the DOL regarding her grievance about unpaid sick leave due to the medical certificate. It was the applicant’s case that she exhausted all internal procedures before approaching DOL regarding this problem. It was her undisputed evidence that she first spoke to her supervisor, then to the manager, to personnel and to her shop steward, but to no avail. 

Based on this evidence, I am satisfied that the applicant followed all internal procedures in respect of the sick leave problem, and that she had no other option but to approach the DOL. It is common cause that the applicant lodged a complaint in respect of other workplace issues as stipulated in the complaint form marked 5, of the bundle. The respondent’s witness gave evidence showing that the complaints were not genuine, in that the applicant was afforded and already enjoying the benefits applicable to her. It is further common cause that the applicant did not discuss other issues with anyone internally before lodging a complaint with DOL. 

It was her submission that these were collective grievances, but she failed to adduce documentary proof showing that other employees were also implicated. She also failed to call these employees as witnesses during this arbitration to corroborate her version. I therefore find that she failed to prove that this was a collective referral of a complaint to the DOL. 

 
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 279

Legal findings 

Section 1(v) of the Protected Disclosures Act stipulates that “an employer may not subject an employee to an occupational detriment on account, or partly on account of having made a protected disclosure”.

A protected disclosure refers to a disclosure that is made by an employee in which they can invoke the protection of the Act, in order to protect themselves from being subjected to an occupational detriment. 

It is common cause that the applicant made certain allegations to the DOL, without first addressing her grievances with the employer and/or her shop stewards. It is further common cause that these allegations were found to be unfounded, in that inspectors from DOL did not continue with the investigation. Although the inspectors did not compile any report, it is my opinion that their discontinuation of the investigation is a reasonable suggestion that the complaints were devoid of substance. 

The Protected Disclosures Act protects every employee from being victimised or subjected to unfair labour practice for making a protected disclosure. It is my opinion that it was not the intention of the legislature to protect any dis-closure that an employee makes, but only disclosures that are based on facts and are valid and genuine. It is my opinion that the applicant’s disclosure was made in bad faith and had the effect of bringing the respondent’s name into disrepute. 

Procedural fairness 

It is common cause that the applicant was afforded an opportunity of a disci-plinary hearing, having being served with a proper notice of disciplinary hearing. 

I am satisfied that the respondent had succeeded in proving on a balance of probabilities that a fair procedure was followed.

The applicant could not point out any procedural irregularities in relation to her dismissal. 

Conclusion

After careful consideration of the evidence presented before me by both parties, I am satisfied that the respondent had succeeded in proving on a balance of probabilities that the applicant committed a serious misconduct warranting summary dismissal. 

I am furthermore satisfied that the respondent’s evidence proves that a fair procedure was followed in effecting the dismissal. 

The following award would accordingly be just and equitable. 

Award
The applicant’s dismissal on 3 April 2006 was procedurally and substantively fair. 
[2007] 3 BALR 274 (CCMA) at 280
The applicant’s dismissal is upheld and she is not entitled to the relief she seeks being retrospective reinstatement. 
The case is dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.

No cases were referred to in the above award.



End of Document