overnment notices • GoewermentskennisGewinGs

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
NO. R. 949	14 SEPTEMBER 2018
PROTECTED DISCLOSURES ACT, 2000 (ACT NO. 26 OF 2000) REGULATIONS RELATING TO PROTECTED DISCLOSURES, 2018

I, Tshililo Michael Masutha, Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, have under section 10 of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000) and, after consultation with the Minister for the Public Service and Administration, made the regulations in the Schedule.

SCHEDULE
Definitions
       1. In these regulations any word or expression to which a meaning has been assigned in the Act has the meaning so assigned to it and, unless the context otherwise indicates-
"the Act" means the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000 (Act No. 26 of 2000).

Protected disclosures to certain persons or bodies
       2. (1)   A disclosure contemplated in section 1 of the Act, can, in addition to the persons and bodies listed in section 8(1)(a), (aA), (aB), (aC), (aD) and (b) of the Act, also be made to the persons or bodies listed in Column 1 of Annexure A to these Regulations, in respect of the description of the matters ordinarily dealt with by the persons or bodies as set out in Column 2 of Annexure A to these Regulations.
              (2) The practical guidelines contemplated in section 10(4) of the Act, must include the name and contact details of the person or person designated by a body to whom a protected disclosure can be made.
              (3) If an employee or worker intends to make a disclosure of an impropriety which is based upon the same facts to two or more persons or bodies referred to in subregulation (1), he or she must inform each person or body to whom such a disclosure is made of that fact.
              (4) Upon receipt of a disclosure contemplated in section 1 of the Act, the body or person who received the disclosure must, ascertain from the employee or worker making the disclosure whether a disclosure based on the same facts has been made to any other person or body and if so that person or body must inform the other person or body accordingly.
              (5) If a disclosure contemplated in section 1 of the Act, which is based upon the same facts, is made to two or more persons or bodies, the persons or bodies concerned must take all reasonable steps to ascertain which person or body is going to conduct the investigation and inform the worker or employee, where possible, accordingly.
Short title
3. These regulations are called the Regulations Relating to Protected Disclosures, 2018.

ANNEXURE A

COLUMN 1
Person/body to whom or which disclosure can be madeCOLUMN2
Description of matters ordinarily dealt with by
personlbodyAnti-Intimidation and Ethical Practices ForumAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety as observed by professionals in their
work environment.Chairpersons of Municipal CouncilsAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or imoroorietv which has a bearina on a Municipal

COLUMN 1
Person/body to whom or which disclosure can be madeCOLUMN 2
Description of matters ordinarily dealt with by person/bodyCouncil.Competition CommissionAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to the promotion and maintenance of competition in South Africa, including the control and evaluation of mergers, the investigation and prosecution of price fixing, fixing of trading conditions, market allocation, collusive tendering, restricted vertical practices and abuse of
dominant oositions.Council for Debt CollectorsAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or imoroorietv with reQard to the collection of debts.Electoral Commission of South AfricaAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to free and fair elections of national,  provincial  and  municipal  legislative
bodies.Estate Agency Affairs BoardAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regards to the conduct of an estate
agent	regarding	trust	monies,	and	irregular transactions that are beina conducted.Executive Authority, as contemplated in the
Financial Management of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act, 2009 (Act No. 10 of 2009)Any alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety which has a bearing on Parliament.Financial and Fiscal CommissionAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to-
(a) the equitable division of revenue raised nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres of government;
(b) the determinations of each province's equitable share of the provincial share of that revenue; and
(c) any other allocations to provinces, local government or municipalities from the national government's share of that revenue and any condition on which those allocations may be
made.Financial Intelligence CentreAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety	with  regard  to  money	laundering
activities or the financing of terrorist and related activities.Financial Sector Conduct Authority and the Prudential AuthorityAny  alleged irregular  or  improper  conduct or
impropriety with regard to financial institutions and the provision of financial services.Independent Communications Authority of South AfricaAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to-
(a) broadcasting in the public interest;
(b) electronic	communications	in	the	public interest; and
(c) postal matters in the oublic interest.Independent Police Investigative DirectorateAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety by a member of the South African
Police Service.
COLUMN1
Penson/body to whom or which dlsdosure can
be madeCOLUMN 2
Description of matters ordinarily dealt with by
person/bodyIndependent Regulatory Board for AuditorsAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to audits performed by
registered auditors.Information RegulatorAny	alleged	unlawful	collection,	retention, dissemination or use of personal information by
public and orivate bodies.International Trade Administration Commission of South AfricaAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to the import or export of Qoods and customs duties.Judicial Inspectorate for Correctional ServicesAny  alleged  irregular  or improper  conduct  or
impropriety with regard to the treatment of inmates in correctional centres and the conditions in correctional centres.Judicial Service CommissionAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or improprietv bv a iudQe of a superior court.Magistrates CommissionAny alleged  irregular  or improper  conduct  or
impropriety by a maqistrate.National Consumer CommissionAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to the social and economic
welfare of consumers.National Energy Regulator of South AfricaAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety  with  regard	to  the  regulation	of
electricity, piped gas and petroleum	pipeline industries.National Gambling BoardAny  alleged  irregular  or improper  conduct or
impropriety with regard to matters relating to casinos, racinQ QamblinQ and wagering.National Prosecuting AuthorityAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to the institution and execution of prosecutions.Office of the Chief JusticeAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to the judicial arm of the Qovernment.Pension Fund AdjudicatorAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety with regard to pensions or pension funds.Public Administration Ethics, Integrity and Disciplinary Technical Assistance UnitAny  alleged  irregular  or improper  conduct  or
impropriety	with regard	to corruption	related misconduct cases in the Public Administration.Special Investigating UnitAny  alleged  irregular  or  improper conduct  or
impropriety with regard to the affairs of any State institution.South African Board for SheriffsAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or improprietv by a sheriff.South African Council for EducatorsAny alleged irregular or improper conduct or impropriety by educators, lecturers or management staff of colleges appointed-
(a) in terms of the Employment of Educators Act, 1998 (Act No. 76 of 1998);
(b) in terms of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996);





