



Vodacom dismissal hearing delayed
IR - News Watch

Vodacom dismissal hearing delayed

Reported on: 20 April 2010

The Labour Court yesterday postponed the case between Vodacom and former employee and whistleblower Mandla Mdluli because of legal technicalities.

Brian Patterson, the director at Edward Nathan Sonnenbergs responsible for Vodacom's litigation, said Mdluli and his lawyers had failed to refer the dispute regarding his 2008 dismissal from the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration to the Labour Court within the 90-day period provided for by the Labour Relations Act.

"They need to apply for condonation. The court can grant that if they show good reason," Patterson said. 

Mdluli's legal team is led by former SABC chief executive advocate Dali Mpofu, who thought the technicality was unnecessary and asked the court for a postponement. It is unclear whether Mdluli will apply for condonation. 

Patterson said the postponement was granted with a cost order against Mdluli, including for the costs of senior counsel and the setting aside of the subpoenas issued to various Vodacom stakeholders, including for KPMG to present a report on alleged corruption at Vodacom.

The date for a new hearing was not provided.

Mdluli's attorney said he had been instructed not to speak to the media.

In January, Vodacom alleged that Mdluli, a former financial manager at the company, developed a vendetta against the group after he was dismissed. It also alleged that he lied about his qualifications when he applied for his position. 

Vodacom said Mdluli made several allegations against its management. This led to the board commissioning KPMG to conduct a forensic audit. 

KMPG's report covered 18 allegations including claims that former chief executive Alan Knott-Craig had approved a R9 million budget overspend to support a company run by his son, while an agency owned by his niece and nephew was awarded a lucrative contract without undergoing a competitive tender process. 

Vodacom said that only its shareholders at the time - Vodafone and Telkom - received the report. Attempts by the Communication Workers Union (CWU) to have it published have failed. 

Knott-Craig denied the allegations and he was exonerated by shareholders. The report allegedly cleared Knott-Craig of corruption or wrongdoing but highlighted "poor judgment". 

Aubrey Tshabalala, the CWU's deputy chairman for Gauteng, said yesterday that the union was waiting for legal advice regarding its requests for the report to be released and for Communications Minister Siphiwe Nyanda to set up an independent commission of inquiry. 

Meanwhile, Bloomberg reported that Vodacom was seeking an interim award from the International Chamber of Commerce to appoint an ad hoc administrator for its business in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Vodacom Group holds 51 percent of Vodacom Congo, with the rest held by Congo Wireless Network (CWN). 

Bob Collymore, Vodacom's head of corporate affairs, told Bloomberg yesterday that Vodacom wanted an administrator to reorganise Vodacom Congo's balance sheet and convert the unit to a public company so that it complied with its licence conditions.

Vodacom Congo decided on April 9 to apply for arbitration after its shareholders could not agree on these terms at an extraordinary meeting.

Before the meeting, CWN accused Vodacom of usury, fraud, forgery, the use of false documents and abuse of trust. Vodacom denies the claims.

Asha Speckman

Business Report 



End of Document