



Fidentia boss to remain behind bars
IR - News Watch

Fidentia boss to remain behind bars

Reported on: 07 March 2007

The arrests of Fidentia boss J Arthur W Brown and director Graham Allen Maddock, suspected of stealing hundreds of millions of rand, may just be the start of a huge Scorpions operation.

They are set to detain more suspects in the financial scandal which has left thousands of poor orphans and widows of mineworkers without a monthly income.

The Scorpions were tight-lipped on Tuesday night, with National Prosecuting Authority spokesperson Lucinda Moonieya saying only that investigations were continuing, but confirming that further arrests were expected. Asked when the public could expect more arrests in the case, possibly SA's biggest white-collar-crime prosecution, Moonieya said: "Soon."

'All I care about is that Brown is charged and sentenced'

The whistleblower in the case, Frans Mahlangu, the suspended Principal Executive Officer of the Mineworkers Provident Fund, who first raised the alarm about Fidentia and Brown's extravagant lifestyle, said: "I cannot wait for the judgment day." 

This was after Brown and Maddock were arrested by the Scorpions in an early-morning swoop at their ultra-luxury homes in Sunset Beach and Constantia respectively. Before midday they appeared in the Cape Town magistrate's court and were remanded for a week. And, if the state has its way, they will remain incarcerated after that.

Prosecutor Bruce Morrison, SC, asked for a postponement to March 15 for further investigation. A formal bail application will then be heard. 

"This is a Schedule 5 offence and the accused will have to produce the evidence if they want bail, not the other way around. This is not going to be a simple case," Morrison said, opposing Klaus von Lieres's request for a speedy conclusion of bail proceedings. 

Brown, 36, and Maddock, 52, were denied bail after they were charged with fraud and theft of R203-million. They face charges of fraud, theft, contravention of the Companies Act, Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, Income Tax Act and sections of the Reserve Bank Act and Control Regulations.

Brown was represented by former Witwatersrand attorney-general Von Lieres, SC, and Maddock by Peter Mihalik, SC. Von Lieres told the court that Brown and Maddock had fixed properties in SA and were not flight risks. 

Von Lieres said the two accused had become "newspaper sellers" since the Fidentia scandal made the headlines, boosting circulations. He complained that the defence had no "specifics" about the Fidentia investigation. 

Fidentia was placed under provisional curatorship by the Cape High Court in February. Financial Services Board spokesperson Russel Michaels said the board had referred the matter to the NPA after inspectors, acting after many complaints of non-payment by widows and orphans, found R682m could not be accounted for.

According to the curators, only R1.8m is left of the more than R1m,4-billion in pension funds managed by the Living Hands Umbrella Fund and belonging to the Mineworkers Provident Fund. 

The transport Seta also stands to lose R245-million invested in Fidentia. 

The curators have raided several companies bought by Brown and have retrenched 450 Fidentia employees.

Brown and Maddock are being held at Goodwood Prison. Friends gave them food parcels. 

Meanwhile, Lubabalo Ngcukana reports that Mahlangu said: "All I care about is that Brown is charged and sentenced. I have always maintained that my allegations are true."

Vusumuzi Ka Nzaphaza

Iol.co.za



End of Document