



PIC disciplinary was process tainted, says fired manager
IR - News Watch

PIC disciplinary was process tainted, says fired manager

Reported on: 24 October 2019

The Public Investment Corporation (PIC) employee who testified to serious malfeasance by senior executives involving the R4.3bn investment into Ayo Technology Solutions has challenged the integrity of the disciplinary process that saw him being fired.

The corporation fired assistant portfolio manager Victor Seanie on Tuesday following the conclusion of a disciplinary process. 

“Mr Seanie was found guilty of the disciplinary charges proffered against him, which included charges of breaching the PIC’s internal policies in investment decisions,” the PIC’s head of corporate affairs Deon Botha said on Thursday in response to questions from Business Day.

“Mr Seanie is one of several senior investment professionals who went through or are undergoing internal disciplinary proceedings at this stage.”

But Seanie is casting doubt on the neutrality of the PIC disciplinary process. “The so-called independent chairperson was appointed by the PIC’s legal representatives and, as a result of his conduct during proceedings, I do not consider him to be impartial,” says Seanie.

He would not be drawn on what his next move would be. 

The PIC would not respond to questions on how Seanie’s testimony to an inquiry into the state-owned asset manager, which could be considered as “whistle-blowing”, was treated in his disciplinary process.

Seanie told the inquiry into PIC in January that his initial suspension was unexpected since he was a “small player in the bigger scheme of things at the PIC and in respect of the Ayo transaction”. 

“It became very important that I speak out as I realised that there were forces that were working against me and this commission could be my only salvation to my good name and my professional integrity,” he told the commission.

Seanie testified how former PIC CEO Dan Matjila pressured him to approve the transaction and even went as far as signing the subscription agreement authorising the approval of the Ayo investment. 

Sygnia CEO Magda Wierzycka said Seanie’s axing was “appalling”. 

“As to whistle-blowers, generally I have often said they are the unsung heroes who often end up in dire financial circumstances because of coming forward and speaking out,” said Wierzycka.

“Victor is one of many in the same boat. I think that the private sector should step in to help those people (even if as atonement for not speaking out when it mattered).”

Earlier in October, the premises of Iqbal Survé’s Sekunjalo Investment Holdings were raided by the Financial Sector Conduct Authority in relation to an investigation into the manipulation of the Ayo share price.  

The PIC’s head of legal services, Lindiwe Dlamini, told parliament earlier in October that a recent media report by Noseweek magazine alleged that Ayo was taking funds offshore. The PIC said it will consider applying for an anti-dissipation order against Ayo, which would effectively freeze its assets.

The PIC commission was granted a third extension by President Cyril Ramaphosa on Tuesday to complete its report. The new deadline is December 15, and the report is expected to make a number of findings in relation to dubious transactions involving the asset manager.

BusinessDay



End of Document