



Whistleblower who made allegations against Nxesi threatened with death in anonymous e-mail messages
IR - News Watch

Whistleblower who made allegations against Nxesi threatened with death in anonymous e-mail messages

Reported on: 20 November 2023

Sunday World reports that a high-ranking official who has blown the whistle on alleged corruption and also frustrated the approval of payments worth R3-billion in the Department of Employment and Labour (DEL) is fearing for her life after receiving death threats.

The official has made allegations of theft, fraud and racketeering against DEL Minister Thulas Nxesi in an explosive affidavit to the Special Investigating Unit (SIU). The official, who cannot be named for legal reasons, has also pointed Nxesi out as the mastermind behind the fresh scheme to siphon public funds meant to train unemployed people. In the sworn affidavit, drafted in June under oath and on conditions of immunity from prosecution, the official attached copies of text messages from an anonymous writer threatening to kill her for spilling the beans. “If you continue stopping adjudication with your stupid tricks, bullets are coming for you. You’ll play your tricks in the graveyard,” a message reads. In the affidavit, the official mentioned Nxesi, former director- general Thobile Lamati, ten department officials and seven service providers among those involved in the alleged scheme. Among the other prominent figures allegedly implicated are UIF chief operating officer Marsha Bronkhorst, former board chairperson Thulani Tshefuta, communications chief director Tebogo Thejane and chief financial officer Fizile Puzi. The Labour Activation Programme unit oversees more than 247 projects with a budget of R3.2-billion, including an employability budget of R2.8-billion and a jobs savings budget of R412-million. The budget is sourced from the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), which invests in UIF funds.

Read the full original of the report in the above regard by Setumo Stone at Sunday World

SR

South African Labour News



End of Document