



New Bill gives parastatals special protection
IR - News Watch

New Bill gives parastatals special protection

Reported on: 15 December 1999

State-owned companies that are being privatised will not have to disclose the sensitive details of their negotiations with potential buyers or partners, according to a special privatisation clause in the Open Democracy Bill. 

The clause will ensure that the documentation on the privatisation of state enterprises is protected ­ to prevent competitors from gaining an unfair advantage in the marketplace ­ according to the Joint Committee on the Open Democracy Bill chairman Johnny de Lange. 

The Bill gives effect to an individual's Constitutional "right of access" to any information "held by the state; to provide people with access to personal information held by private bodies and to provide for the correction of personal information held by state or personal bodies. 

The Bill seeks to ensure the right of privacy with regulations on the "use and disclosure of that information". 

The section on the protection of whistle blowers aims to "provide for the protection of persons disclosing evidence of contraventions of the law, serious maladministration or corruption, in Governmental bodies". 

De Lange said a number of companies, such as Telkom had complained that the Bill would place them at a disadvantage if it was required that they should release sensitive details of the privatisation process. 

The "privatisation clause" would only provide protection of information about the privatisation process. All other information would have to be disclosed as was the norm with public companies, he said. 

The clause would ensure a "level playing field'' between Government parastatals and competitors, he said. 

The Democratic Party's Kent Durr said he had a problem with the clause because it meant that state enterprises were placed in a better position than public companies which were legally compelled to disclose details of their dealings. 

However, De Lange said that the proposed legislation would only deal with the "narrow" issue of the privatisation process and not with mergers or acquisitions, like that of the recent failed merger between banking groups Stanbic and Nedcor. 

The Sowetan 

Waghied Misbach 



End of Document