



CONSTRUCTIVE DISMISSAL – ALL OPTIONS TO BE EXHAUSTED
IR - Weekly Comment

CONSTRUCTIVE DISMISSAL – ALL OPTIONS TO BE EXHAUSTED

Constructive dismissal, as contemplated by section 186(1)(e) of the LRA, is an unusual concept. While the termination of the employment relationship appears on the face of it to be a voluntary resignation, it transmutes into a dismissal in circumstances that the so-called resignation is precipitated by unfair conduct on the part of the employer which renders continued employment intolerable. Intolerability goes beyond mere inconvenience or frustration and “implies a situation that is more than can be tolerated or endured; or insufferable. It is something which is simply too great to bear, not to be put up with or beyond the limits of tolerance….” (HC Heat Exchangers (Pty) Ltd v Araujo and others [2020] 3 BLLR 280 (LC) para 49). In order to establish constructive dismissal there must be a causal link between the intolerability and the termination. 

It is the employee’s duty to discharge the onus of proof that he or she was in fact dismissed. In order to prove constructive dismissal it must be established that i) the employee terminated the contract of employment, ii) the reason for termination of the contract is that continued employment has become intolerable for the employee and iii) the employer must be culpably responsible for the intolerable circumstances. All three requirements must be present for it to be said that a constructive dismissal has been established. (Solid Doors (Pty) Ltd v Theron NO and Others (CA4/03) [2004] ZALAC 14 (22 July 2004) at para 28.)

In National Health Laboratory Service v Yona and Others [2015] 10 BLLR 2002 (LAC) [para 30] the LAC noted that “[t]he test for proving a constructive dismissal is an objective one. The conduct of the employer toward the employee and the cumulative impact thereof must be such that, viewed objectively, the employee could not reasonably be expected to cope with.” While it is not necessary to prove that the employee had “no choice but to resign”, the employee needs to provide evidence that he or she reasonably believed that the employer’s actions had made continued employment impossible and that resignation was a reasonable step to take in the circumstances.

Where alternative means of resolving the complaint or addressing the intolerable situation exist, such alternatives must be exercised (where possible and reasonable) before terminating employment. “An employee cannot merely resign and claim constructive dismissal while other options are available and without affording the employer an opportunity to rectify the causes of his or her complaints.” (Johnson v Rajah NO [2017] ZALCJHB 25 (26 January 2017) at para 74).

In SALGA v CCMA, Ngobeni NO and Khanyile (Case no: JR 1603/17 handed down on 13 August 2020) the employee Mr Khanyile claimed to have been unfairly constructively dismissed by his employer, SALGA. Mr Khanyile was payroll officer at the employer, whose duties included the processing of payment claims submitted by Councillors from all the provincial offices. His alleged intolerable work circumstances arose over his discontent with the manner in which SALGA processed and paid claims by Councillors. It was his evidence during the arbitration proceedings that many irregular claims were submitted and in some instances he was instructed by either his immediate supervisor, the CEO or the CFO to proceed with payments of these claims. The employee testified that he felt ignored, that the culture of irregular payments was affecting his work and that he was concerned that an audit query will be directed to him. While he conceded that he would not have been personally liable for the irregular transactions, he alleged that he nonetheless felt compromised by his part in the “maladministration of funds”. He was also adamant that that he could not have followed the internal processes available to him because both the CEO and the CFO were implicated in the irregular transactions that led to his resignation. 

On 1 February 2017, Mr Khanyile tendered his resignation and referred an unfair dismissal dispute to the CCMA, claiming that he was constructively dismissed. The CCMA found that the employee had discharged the onus of proving that the conduct of the employer had made continued employment unbearable and awarded him compensation of 10 months’ remuneration. The employer accordingly took the matter on review.

In assessing the evidence on review the Court found that the employee failed to prove that the payments made were unlawful and how effecting these payments made his continued employment intolerable. The Court also attached significance to the fact that Mr Khanyile did not report the conduct of his superiors, which he alleged amounted to ‘corruption and maladministration’, in terms of the whistleblowing procedures available to him - a recourse that he was well aware of. He also failed to make use of the formal grievance procedures available. The court accordingly concluded that Mr Khanyile failed to show that the employment relationship had become so intolerable that there was no reasonable option other than to tender his resignation. 

In reaching its decision the court cited with approval the dictum of the Labour Court in HC Heat Exchangers [2020] 3 BLLR 280 (LC) at paras 35 to 39 that: 

‘…where there is a grievance process available to the employee which would, if applied, resolve the cause of complaint, the employee must follow it. If the employee does not follow it, the employee cannot as a matter of principle claim constructive dismissal, unless the employee proves that there exists truly exceptional circumstances that may serve to absolve the employee from this obligation. And for the employee to subjectively claim that he or she has no confidence in the grievance outcome or that the employer would not reform, cannot suffice as such exceptional circumstances.’

Establishing whether constructive dismissal has taken place is a jurisdictional fact that must be established objectively. If there was no constructive dismissal the CCMA does not have the jurisdiction to arbitrate and the employment relationship terminates contractually. Once the employee is able to prove that a constructive dismissal has taken place the onus shifts to the employer to prove that such dismissal is nonetheless fair. In assessing constructive dismissal disputes, a holistic approach thus needs to be taken in terms of which the conduct of both the employee and employer is objectively evaluated against the backdrop of tolerability. 

Until next time,

Tamara Cohen



End of Document