



SA businesses pay lip service to ethics, survey finds
IR - News Watch

SA businesses pay lip service to ethics, survey finds 

Reported on: 13 March 2002

Durban - South African companies have not been able to integrate ethics management practices into their existing management processes and many were only paying lip service to ethics, a local survey done by major accounting firm KPMG revealed on Wednesday. 

Daniel Malan, KPMG business ethics consulting manager said 166 organisations, both from the public and the private sector, participated in the survey, the first of its kind ever to be conducted in the country. 

The survey showed that while 80 percent of companies who participated had a basic ethics infrastructure n place, very few organisations had actually managed to integrate ethics management practices. 

The survey, done in partnership with the Public Service Commission and Transparency South Africa aimed at measuring the extent to which companies in the country had succeeded in establishing basic ethics management practices to prevent fraud and corruption and to encourage ethical behaviour among workers. 

The survey indicated that the ethics infrastructure of local organisations was well established. A total of 84 percent had codes of conduct while 74 percent others provided whistle blower protection. 

But, only 12 percent of companies surveyed assisted new employees in integrating ethics into their everyday activities. 

Malan said this implied that some organisations showed little commitment to ethical practice. 

"The very existence of a code of conduct does not imply that new employees will know how to use it." 

He said if the situation was not rectified, companies' good intentions and existing practices might go to waste. 

"Management needs to provide sufficient leadership for ethics to play a meaningful role in organisations. 

"Currently they rely on a few basic practices to do the job." 

Malan said the results were indicative of a general trend in South Africa. 

The survey showed that fraud and theft, security of information, financial management procedures, racial discrimination and workplace safety were seen as the most critical ethical issues facing organisations. 

According to PSC director Roderick Davids it was also clear from the survey that financial risk still overrode reputational risk when it came to determining ethical priorities. 

"Organisations are not too concerned about bad press as long as it does not affect their bottom line," he said. 

Chief executive officer of Transparency South Africa Stiaan van der Merwe said organisations had to take a critical look at their ethics goals and demonstrate their commitment achieving these goals. 

Among the recommendations included in the survey are for organisations to clean-up their ethics functions and to assign clear responsibilities for ethics at senior management level, designing and implementing effective ethics policies and measuring ethical performance. 

The Business Report 

Sapa 



End of Document