



Night of the long knives at Crime Intelligence, with spook outfit mired in purge, capture claims
IR - News Watch

Night of the long knives at Crime Intelligence, with spook outfit mired in purge, capture claims

Reported on: 21 November 2024

Jeff Wicks

news24

A cold war is raging in the uppermost ranks of the police's Crime Intelligence division, with court action exposing claims of corruption, political meddling, and the spectre of a purge of senior officers. 

A key battle in this internecine conflict will play out in the Johannesburg Labour Court on Friday where spook whistleblower Brigadier Tiyani Hlungwani will fight to save his job.

In 2017, Hlungwani halted a R45 million splurge on an eavesdropping device known as a "grabber" just days before the ANC's Nasrec elective conference, purportedly a ruse to mask a money laundering scheme to buy votes. 

Hlungwani occupied a critical role as the head of the spook outfit's Secret Fund, also known as the slush fund, a shadowy stash of cash used to fund covert police operations.

After halting the Nasrec deal and making protected disclosures of corruption against high-ranking officers above him, he faced waves of disciplinary action and criminal charges - which all amounted to nought, according to his court papers. 

As a result, he has been on paid suspension for six years and declined several lures of offers of other posts, moves he sketches as a covert bid to push him away from control of the slush fund for nefarious ends. 

Hlungwani launched an urgent court bid in September when his salary was stopped, all while disciplinary processes remained ongoing. He asked the court to reinstate him to his office and pay him.

He has been without a salary for three months.

Cold war

Hlungwani is facing off against Crime Intelligence boss Dumisani Khumalo who, Hlungwani avers:

Is executing a quiet purge of the senior ranks, notably those who made protected disclosures and set in motion investigations against him.
Is installing loyalists into key positions to maintain control of the outfit - one with a long legacy of politicisation and financial looting.
That he fails to hold a valid security clearance - making him unfit for the post - which was denied because of his failure to declare business interests.

Khumalo opposes the action and, in papers before court, counters he is executing his mandate of righting the Crime Intelligence ship and Hlungwani is a delinquent employee guilty of misconduct. 

Khumalo was appointed as head of Crime Intelligence in the last throes of then-police minister Bheki Cele's term, and police regulations dictate the minister would have had to endorse such a senior appointment. 

Khumalo previously headed the Political Killings Task Team, a cohort assembled by Cele that veered from standard procedure and reported directly to him.

The two men, both from KwaZulu-Natal, are known to be close. Khumalo has no previous Crime Intelligence experience. 

It appears he still leads that team, which was said to have at one point more than 600 active dockets, although his reporting lines and dual role remain unclear. 

The bid to oust Hlungwani comes two weeks after another high-ranking officer, Major-General Feroz Khan, rushed to the same court to prevent an expeditious disciplinary process and his axing.

Khan was implicated in a belatedly opened criminal case linked to the seizure of nearly a tonne of cocaine in 2021, accused of meddling in the scene and defeating the ends of justice. 

Khan also holds an influential post, heading counterintelligence and security. 

In his defence, he too said he made protected disclosures that implicated Khumalo.

His boss has also opposed his action, and it has emerged in court papers the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) declined to prosecute Khan on charges linked to the drug bust.

A prosecutor said the situation amounted to a dispute between opposing police factions. 

Copping heat

In March, Brigadier Dennis Chili, a 38-year police veteran who had headed Crime Intelligence's legal services department for nine years, was dismissed for misconduct over his alleged shoplifting of an air fryer six months prior. 

He too attempted to stay an expeditious disciplinary enquiry in the Labour Court, a process which concluded before his case was heard, and he was summarily dismissed. 

His post is a vital guardrail against corruption and police criminality, and it was Chili who, with Hlungwani, reported the Nasrec grabber splurge irregularities to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, which set in motion a criminal investigation. 

Chili has made representations to the NPA on why charges of shoplifting should be withdrawn in a case he claims was merely a ruse and stich-up to root him out. 

Keeping with the trope, Chili made protected disclosures to the Inspector-General of Intelligence, which set him on a collision course with Khumalo. 

Chili was suspended and ultimately fired by his superior, Lieutenant-General Simo Chamane, who previously served as Cele's legal advisor, and shared a long history with him before he was appointed to a top police job last year. 

He was, Chili claims, also implicated in one of his protected disclosures several years prior. 

All cast a pall over the leadership of the Crime Intelligence division - a 6 000-strong unit dedicated to unravelling rampant crimes like extortion, political killings and assassinations - now in a leadership storm. 

The central and common defence raised by Hlungwani, Khan and Chili is the issue of Khumalo's security clearance, with each reporting discrepancies in various forms about how his original clearance was awarded. 

They concluded what was usually a month-long vetting process for Khumalo just days before his appointment, referring to various irregular nuances within the truncated process. 

While sources within Crime Intelligence said their reports to the Inspector-General of Intelligence resulted in an investigation and a finding that Khumalo's clearance be withdrawn, and that the process be done afresh, the Inspector-General would not be drawn to confirm or deny that information. 

Asked directly about the current state of Khumalo's clearance, police spokesperson Brigadier Athlenda Mathe declined to answer. 

Top secret clearance is a prerequisite for a role centred almost exclusively on dealing with information classified on various strata. 

Hlungwani alleged further Khumalo's appointment itself was irregular, with him being handpicked without an interview process, which flew in the face of police regulations.

Khumalo counterpunch

While Khumalo contests the allegations and painted himself as a veteran officer driving a clean-up, he launched his own urgent interdict against Hlungwani, which will also be heard on Friday.  

He has asked the court to interdict Hlungwani from contacting other employees while resolving his other court action.

In his papers, seen by News24, Khumalo holds Hlungwani is a disgruntled employee who was harassing his colleagues in Crime Intelligence, notably Colonel Eugene Pitout and Lieutenant-General Peter Jacobs. 

He attached screenshots of WhatsApp messages, allegedly sent by Hlungwani, in which he berates Jacobs and denigrates him as a rapist, and attacks Pitout for allegedly surveilling him as an intimidation tactic at Khumalo's behest. 

Jacobs, the previous head of Crime Intelligence and Hlungwani's superior, was charged with rape but the case was withdrawn.

He was appointed to the role, Hlungwani claimed, without declaring the matter. 

Hlungwani had made protected disclosures against Jacobs during his tenure as well, related to the purchase of grabbers worth R102 million outside of the law. These grabbers stood gathering dust for years as a result. 

Of Pitout, Hlungwani is understood to have confronted a man taking pictures of his car who claimed to have been sent by Pitout. 

In his papers, Hlungwani describes Pitout as a henchman of Khumalo. 

Khumalo has launched strong opposition to what could be seen as a roiled management structure, with the removal of key officers now contested in court. 

He alleged Hlungwani was targeting and harassing his "co-employees" and his attacks infringed on their human rights, while also being tantamount to continued misconduct.  

Mathe said the police would not comment on any matters currently before court, saying: "Our Crime Intelligence unit, in terms of its mandate, has improved and there is overall stability within the environment - recent successes achieved in the fight against crime are testament to this." 

news24



End of Document