



'Blood will flow' threat follows fraud claims
IR - News Watch

'Blood will flow' threat follows fraud claims

Reported on: November 09 2009

The whistleblower and the investigator into fraud and corruption allegations at the Stellenbosch municipality have both taken "security precautions" after threats left them fearing for their safety.

Municipal manager Ian Kenned, who was returned to office by a unanimous council vote on Friday, now has a security consultant watching his back.

And businessman Thomas Mpela, who spoke out about alleged tender irregularities, confirmed he had "taken precautions" after potential witnesses were warned that "blood will flow".

"I am not in hiding, but I am concerned about my safety because some of the key potential witnesses have already been threatened," Mpela said.

He told the Cape Argus on Sunday he would lay a charge with Stellenbosch police on Monday over the "serious threats".

This comes after the Stellenbosch council was thrown into disarray last week after Mpela alleged that seven people, including mayor Patrick Swartz and his deputy Cameron Mcako, had defrauded him of R75 000.

Mpela was allegedly told to pay R1-million to secure building contracts worth R3m.

Minutes from an audit committee meeting held last week note that Kenned expressed his "concerns for the safety of himself and his family".Kenned also provided the committee "with proof of the threats to his life".

He arrived at Friday's meeting - attended by Mcako but not Swartz - with a bodyguard.

Commenting on Sunday on his decision to blow the whistle on what he called "the cartel of warlords" whose activities were "getting way out of hand", Mpela said: "Somebody had to put a stop to this."

In addition to laying a charge, which police confirmed they were investigating, Mpela spilt the beans to Kenned, who launched an investigation. 

But Kenned was promptly and illegally placed on "special leave" by Swartz last week, after the mayor was informed he was being investigated in connection with Mpela's allegations.

Swartz further appointed an acting municipal manager, despite an order from the speaker that Kenned not be removed from office.

It is understood that the mayor, deputy mayor and implicated officials will face the boot this week pending the outcome of investigations.

However, according to the DA, Swartz and Mcako were not only stripped of their powers on Friday but were already suspended, as the unanimous vote at Friday's meeting accepted the recommendations of an audit committee meeting on Monday last week.

The audit committee recommended that "the councillors implicated in the alleged fraud allegations be suspended pending the outcome of the forensic investigation".

DA chief whip Cyril Jooste on Sunday confirmed that, according to his party, the council vote effectively meant implicated councillors would be suspended until the investigation was complete.

But municipal spokesperson Luvuyo Zantsi said that while the council "noted" the recommendations of the audit committee, Mcako and Swartz had not yet been suspended.

Meanwhile, another development flowing from Friday's council meeting, which was closed to the public and press, is that all tenders since April 2008, when Swartz and Mcako took office, are to be investigated.

The ANC's Andre Gaum said on Friday the party's provincial task team would discuss the matter today.

Mcako on Sunday denied allegations of wrongdoing. 

Swartz said on Sunday night he was still in office and still executive mayor. He was adamant he still had "all the powers" vested in the mayor, but declined to comment further when questioned how this was possible in light of Friday's decision. He again denied any wrongdoing, and said he was waiting to hear what he had allegedly done wrong.

Ella Smook

Iol.co.za



End of Document