



R1bn fraud being probed
IR - News Watch

R1bn fraud being probed

Reported on: 26 September 1997

IN THE biggest government corruption case in KwaZulu Natal, commercial crime detectives are investigating a R1,1 billion fraud in a single provincial department. 

It is believed the department concerned is the department of social welfare and pensions, the scam involving widespread payment of false pensions. 

Further details of the case are still being kept under wraps, but provincial Safety and Security Minister Nyanga Ngubane disclosed last night that the amount involved was equivalent to the annual provincial police budget. 

An investigation is to be started. 

Speaking at the opening of the new offices of the commercial crime unit in the province, the minister said he was amazed that investigations involving less than R1 million were considered "small fry" and amounts of R12 million were "banded about as commonplace". 

He said the "veritable buffet of crime" extended across every provincial department. 

"Examples include ghost pensioners and officials who receive monthly remunerations, social workers and magistrates who deprive pensioners of their payments, fraudulent generation of cheques, fraud in the school feeding scheme, theft of medicines and false payouts under the housing development schemes. 

"This situation is not unique to KwaZulu Natal and if the other provinces had the guts to remove their existing masks of silence, they would see the stark reality of commercial crime." 

He said the threat of commercial crime "screamed out" to those at the highest levels of governance that more funding and expertise was required. 

"Funds have been found to devise new and better systems allowing for controlled access and audit programmes. 

"And a programme encouraging whistle­blowing and affording proper protection to witnesses needs to be implemented forthwith." 

Mr Ngubane said that since the establishment of the "corruption­free province" campaign earlier this year and the launch of the toll­free reporting number 432 positive calls had been received and were under investigation. 

Police headquarters was now considering circulating this initiative to other provinces for possible implementation. 

Referring to the extent of commercial crime in the country, national Minister of Safety and Security Sydney Mufamadi said the Office for Serious Economic Crime was at present investigating 31 cases involving R12 billion. 

He warned that this, coupled with substantial tax avoidance, could result in higher taxes which would increase price distortions and overall inefficiency. 

"Over the past years syndicates have developed a false sense of security . . . I can assure you this will not be the case for much longer as we re­engineer the criminal justice system and wipe out the corruption."

Mercury 

Tania Broughton 



End of Document