



SAA’s Cynthia Stimpel to fight suspension
IR - News Watch

SAA’s Cynthia Stimpel to fight suspension

Reported on: 3 August 2016

CYNTHIA Stimpel, the suspended head of treasury for South African Airways, will on Thursday apply for an urgent interdict from the Labour Court against the airline from proceeding with a disciplinary hearing against her.

This happened after she blew the whistle on a dodgy finance deal bigger than Nkandla.

Stimpel was suspended by the airline on July 13 for removing company documents, which SAA said was a "breach of SAA’s code and ethics".

Her disclosure of documents detailing how the airline skirted procurement processes in selecting BnP Capital to source R15bn in funding in return for a R256.5m kickback was the key to the deal being cancelled.

Stimpel told acting chief financial officer Phumeza Nhantsi that BnP’s services were three times more expensive than the nearest quote she had received from banks including Absa and RMB.

In an e-mail to Nhantsi, Stimpel writes: "When I do the calculations, according to this hypothetical quote from Absa … I see that SAA can save 5 sixths of the funds calculated by for the BnP Transaction … her quote is 25bps, which is 0.0025 or 0.25%.

"I am still uncomfortable with the document that has been approved by the BAC (bid adjudicating committee) for a fee of 1.5%."

Nhantsi ignored this information, according to e-mails in the court documents, and told Stimpel she no longer needed price comparisons since the plan already had board approval.

In court papers filed on Tuesday, Stimpel lays out how she felt that after repeated attempts to halt the process by appealing to Nhantsi, National Treasury and the Public Protector to stop the deal (all of whom did nothing), she had no other option but to approach the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa).

After discussing her deep discomfort and concern with her daughters and her husband, who was worried that if she said something her personal safety and the safety of their family could come under threat, she said she had to speak up.

She was warned against making a disclosure by a colleague, Joshua du Plessis, executive committee member and acting head of group strategy.

"He advised me not to disclose it internally because it would go to the board and it would either be concealed and/or I would be suspended immediately. He cited the example of a colleague, Sylvain Bosc (who had been chief commercial officer), to whom this happened," Stimpel says.

The case, which will be made on behalf of Stimpel by Steven Budlender SC, argues that Stimpel’s disclosure of the information to Outa is protected by the Protected Disclosures Act, and that she therefore cannot be disciplined by SAA.

In Stimpel’s affidavit she says SAA’s actions to discipline her make no sense since the airline said after investigating the deal it had decided to cancel the deal. But Stimpel says the investigation was only prompted by Outa’s action, and her role in that action was central.

"Despite this, it is now apparent that SAA is intent on disciplining me for this very conduct, even though it prevented SAA acting unlawfully, and even though it prevented unlawful and unnecessary expenditure of public funds to the tune of R250m," she says.

SAA is expected to oppose the matter.

The airline’s spokesman, Tlali Tlali, has not responded yet to a request for comment.

Outa successfully used the information supplied by Stimpel in a court application to stop SAA from going ahead with the transaction, which would have cost the country more than Nkandla.

In it [sic] court papers Outa alleged there were 19 alleged breaches of the airline’s supply chain management that allegedly contravened sections of the Public Finance Management Act, and the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act, among others.

Business Day

BD Live



End of Document