



Justice Department suspends 13 senior officials in offices of masters of high court in anti-corruption sweep
IR - News Watch

Justice Department suspends 13 senior officials in offices of masters of high court in anti-corruption sweep

Reported on: 29 April 2024

City Press reports that in a massive crackdown on corruption and incompetence, the Department of Justice last week placed 13 senior managers and other officials on precautionary suspensions, pending the outcome of investigations into allegations of financial irregularities and maladministration in the affairs of the Masters of the High Court and Family Law Services.

The suspensions included the masters of the high courts in Johannesburg, Pretoria and Bloemfontein. The suspensions have raised serious concerns that service delivery could be affected, but the department assured the public that the move was to “clean” the offices so that things could run smoothly. It said it had appointed other officials to act in those positions to ensure continuity of service delivery. Following several complaints from whistleblowers and members of the public, the department instituted an internal investigation and also asked the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to probe the allegations in 2020. After concluding its investigation last month, the SIU submitted its report to President Cyril Ramaphosa. The final report, which was also given to the department, made several recommendations and referrals of consequence management. Master of the Johannesburg High Court, Leonard Pule, his deputy Reuben Maphaha and their assistant Andrew Masumbuka were suspended after allegations of maladministration, corruption, fraud and irregularities in their offices. The department also placed the Master of the Pretoria High Court, Penelope Roberts, on suspension after she was implicated in the irregular appointment of liquidator Enver Motala, who was struck off the roll more than 20 years ago. The Master of the Bloemfontein High Court, Jan du Plessis, was also served with a suspension letter. Apparently, the Master of the Mahikeng High Court resigned after he had been interviewed by the investigator regarding certain allegations late last year.

Read the full original of the report in the above regard by Norman Masungwini at City Press (subscriber access only)

Read too, Master of the High Court offices suspend senior officials amid probe into maladministration, at News24

SR

South African Labour News



End of Document