



Protection for informers on company crime
IR - News Watch

Protection for informers on company crime

Reported on: 02 May 2000

You have a secret. But you also have a career to think of, a family to support and a mortgage to pay. 

If you tell you stand to lose your job or, at the very least, destroy your future prospects ­ because your secret is about wrong­doing in your company, and its disclosure is not going to please the bosses. 

However, South Africa will soon have a law aimed at protecting so­called whistle­blowers. Parliament's justice portfolio committee approved the Protected Disclosures Bill earlier this month, and it is scheduled to be passed by the National Assembly before the end of May 

The whistle­blower law allows employees to approach the courts for protection against an occupational detriment and excludes any disclosure which would constitute an offence, such as the disclosure of information that is subject to secrecy legislation. 

The Bill also outlaws contractual provisions which attempt to discourage an employee from disclosing malpractices. It is hoped the new law will have a major impact on fraud and corruption, which costs South Africa a staggering R40­billion each year. 

According to the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the city's share of fraud is an estimated R4.3­billion, or the annual household income of 200 000 families. 

Along with the introduction of the new law, several private institutions are offering ways to facilitate its implementation, while ensuring confidentiality to whistle­blowers. 

One of the first security companies to become involved is the Enforce Security group, which launched Whistle­Blower Anonymous. 

The project was set up as an independent division within the group in association with the business advisory firm, Pricewaterhouse Coopers. 

Mr Reg Horne, director of Justicia, a subsidiary of the group, said that Whistle­Blower Anonymous gave people the opportunity to blow the whistle on the criminal activities of colleagues, from the factory floor to the boardroom, without fear of intimidation. 

DAILY NEWS 

Robert Brand 



End of Document