






IN THE BARGAINING COUNCIL FOR THE CIVIL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY (“BCCEI”) HELD AT JOHANNESBURG

In the arbitration between




A R B I T R A T I O N A W A R D


CASE NUMBER:	GAEK 9945-17
DATES OF ARBITRATION:	22 NOVEMBER 2017
22 JANUARY 2018
DATE AWARD SUBMITTED:	27 JANUARY 2018
NAME OF COMMISSIONER:	ITUMELENG WILLIAMS








Centre for Dispute Resolution
Block F, Eastgate Office Park, 24 South Blvd, Bruma P O Box 2699, Bedfordview, Johannesburg, 2008 Tel No. (011) 450 4966/3
Fax No. 086 550 1688
Email: disputes@bccei.co.za

Details of hearing and representation

This matter was referred for arbitration to the Bargaining Council for the Civil Engineering Industry (the Council) in terms of section 191 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (“the Act) and was heard at the office of the Council on the above dates.

The applicant appeared in person whereas Ms. Malimabe represented the respondent.

Issue to be decided

The purpose of this arbitration is to determine whether the dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair.

Background

The applicant allegedly performed a private job during working hours for personal gain using the company resources without authorisation. He furthermore allegedly refused to provide a written statement on the issue upon request.

Survey of evidence

Respondent

Ms. Ntlemo had a blocked drain and contacted the municipality for assistance which in turn dispatched the respondent to attend to the problem. The team that arrived at her residence informed her after inspecting the blockage that the municipality was not responsible for same but rather it was a private job. One of the team members advised that they could unblock the pipes for R 600,00 and provided her with his contact details. Ms. Ntlemo contacted the said gentleman on 22 June 2017 and informed him that she had the required amount for fixing the problem. The man she spoke to indicated that R 600,00 was negligible and Ms. Ntlemo offered him an additional amount of R 200,00.

The applicant and one Nimrod arrived at her residence in a vehicle accompanied by five (5) colleagues. This vehicle had the particulars of the company and contact details which Ms. Ntlemo recorded. She paid Nimrod R 800,00 in the presence of the applicant after the pipe had been unblocked. The blockage, however, happened once more two weeks later. Ms. Ntlemo called the number she saw on the company vehicle when Nimrod was unresponsive upon being informed about the recurrence of the blockage.

Mr. Makananisa is the contracts manager and has a team of artisans reporting to him. Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality (EMM) requested the respondent to attend to a blockage at house number 686 Magubane Street, Mavimbela Section, in Katlehong. The applicant was part of the team dispatched to that house. The job card returned after attending to the task revealed that the blockage was a private job for the dweller’s account. The implication was that EMM was not responsible for fixing the problem. A whistle-blower later took the company into confidence that the applicant and team members in fact performed the task and charged the house owners an amount of R 800,00 which they never declared to the respondent. The applicant refused to write a statement of the incident when instructed to do so. He, however, admitted at the hearing that he had seen Ms. Ntlemo hand over R 800,00 to Nimrod.

Applicant

The testimony of the applicant was particularly brief. He did not know that the team members were doing a private job when he accompanied them to house numbers 685 and 686 Magubane Street in Katlehong. He refused to write a statement because he knew nothing of the misconduct. The applicant denied wrongdoing at the disciplinary hearing.

Analysis of evidence and argument

It is common cause that the applicant was part of the team that was sent to house number 686 Magubane Street in Katlehong to unblock a pipe. The job card returned to the respondent stated that the problem could not be attended to as it was a private job. Distilled, the owner and not EMM, was responsible for the costs of unblocking the pipes. It was for that reason that the team never performed the task. It is not in dispute that this team returned to houses number 685 and 686 to fix the problem after receiving a call from Ms. Ntlemo. The applicant, it is common cause, was part of the team once more upon its second return to these houses.

Although the applicant was a boilermaker by qualification and a supervisor in this field, he nonetheless assisted the plumbing team with provision of the required tools and materials upon attending to the blockage on the 22 June 2017. This much is clear from his version. The plumbing tasks to correct the situation were performed during working hours. The parties, however, are poles apart whether Ms. Ntlemo handed over R 800,00 to Nimrod in the presence of the applicant after completing the private job. The version that is credible, probable and reliable must prevail.

Ms. Ntlemo was emphatic and unwavering in her assertion that the applicant was at her residence with his colleagues when the team attended to the blockage. She gave Nimrod R 800,00 in full view of the applicant. The team used part of this money to buy meat which the applicant ate. Although the applicant denied having observed an exchange of cash, he never disputed the version that he ate the meat that was bought immediately after the blockage was fixed. It is further noteworthy that Mr. Makananisa was wholly unchallenged that the applicant conceded in the disciplinary hearing that he saw Ms. Ntlemo pay R 800,00 to Nimrod.

The applicant was present during the first trip to Ms. Ntlemo’s house when it was discovered that the blockage in the pipes was not located within his area of responsibility of EMM but on private property. A job card to that effect was generated. It is most improbable that the applicant, a supervisor, albeit in boiler-making, would not have been aware of the reason why the team did not fix the problem on that occasion.

The second trip to the said house on the 22 June 2017 was triggered by a call to the private number provided to Ms. Ntlemo by the same team during the first earlier visit. This team would have urged her to contact the respondent’s offices if they wanted their employer to perform the work. The purpose of providing Ms. Ntlemo with a personal mobile number was to ensure that the team did this private job for their own enrichment. The applicant is not a plumber but boilermaker supervisor. He nonetheless actively participated in the effort to address the blockage on site and even ate meat purchased with monies received from Ms. Ntlemo and her neighbour. The applicant in all probability knew that the money paid to Nimrod was for fixing the blockage. It is, accordingly, inconceivable that he was in the dark about the fact that the team was performing a private job. The respondent invoices EMM for services rendered to it and payments are made directly into the company account. The clients do not make payments in cash to supervisors and worse still, without prior invoice.

Assuming there was credence to the applicant’s version that he was unaware of the private job, surely, he would not have hesitated to co-operate with the investigations and to that end make a written statement on the matter to the respondent. The conclusion that the refusal so to reduce a statement to writing was calculated to cover his tracks is simply inescapable. It furthermore did not go unnoticed that the applicant became progressively irritable when pressed on pertinent issues in cross-examination. An innocent employee was most likely to take the employer into confidence to ensure his exoneration.

The respondent’s witnesses came across as credible and their testimony was supplementary. On the contrary, the applicant’s version was tainted in material respects. Not only did he fail to dispute the version of the respondent on critical aspects but furthermore fell short of putting his version to the respondent’s witnesses. He failed to do so notwithstanding the extension of a helping hand to him on how to conduct cross-examination. Needless to state that the matter stood down on occasions to afford him the latitude to consult with his attorney who waited outside the hearing room.

The version of the respondent’s witnesses, accordingly, must hold sway.

The applicant and the team, all of whom had been disciplined, utilized the respondent’s vehicle to attend to a private job. They even used the tools and pipes of the employer to fix the blockage. The money illicitly received for this service was not declared to the respondent but kept by the team. Part of this money was used to buy lunch enjoyed at Mr. Ntlemo’s residence. All this happened during working hours for which the respondent remunerated the applicant. The applicant, in effect, was paid twice for the period he fixed the blockage at the said place in Katlehong on the day. The matter is further compounded by the stratagem of continued deception in these proceedings. The respondent’s uncontested version that the employment relationship has been rendered intolerable resonates with me more so as the applicant was a supervisor. The latter’s assertion that he had been instructed by one Sifiso, a general worker, to fix the blockage, at best, is nonsensical.

The dismissal of the applicant, consequently, cannot be successfully attacked on substantive grounds. Dismissal was an appropriate sanction.

Award

The dismissal of the applicant was substantively fair.

SIGNED AT JOHANNESBURG ON THIS 27TH DAY OF JANUARY 2018




Itumeleng Williams Council Commissioner