



State must actively steer employment equity in SA
IR - News Watch

State must actively steer employment equity in SA

Reported on: 15 May 2003-05-15

Cape Town - The introduction of employment equity legislation had hardly been a roaring success, with many groups still facing discrimination and top management still dominated by white males, parliament's labour committee heard yesterday.

Submissions from interest groups blamed this on a lack of progress on key issues, including private sector resistance, the lack of enforcement by the department of labour, the failure of intergovernmental co-operation in key areas such as education and the preference given to black over coloured and Chinese workers.

It also heard that whistle-blowers who reported blatant discrimination were given no protection from victimisation or harassment afterwards.

Another concern was that the department concentrated more on getting firms to compile employment equity reports than on examining the quality of the affirmative action programmes or ensuring that employers were actually telling the truth.

The labour law centre at the University of Stellenbosch reported that recent research into employment equity in universities and colleges had found that the department's monitoring had been "largely formalistic ... aimed mainly at testing compliance with the formal prescripts of the Employment Equity Act ... rather than gauging the significance of real and perceived barriers".

The centre recommended that the government "should assume a more active steering role" in ensuring employment equity

In its submission, the Black Management Forum said that between 2001 and 2002, the race and gender profile of companies had hardly changed, with white males still dominating, especially in top and senior management.

Monitoring by the department had been weak and there was "a perception that the private sector is not taking the issue of employment equity seriously", it said.

The forum recommended that the department draw up an action plan to assess progress throughout the year, punish those who violated set conditions and monitor and verify empowerment more thoroughly.

Lobby groups representing women and disabled people also complained that they had not benefited to any meaningful extent from the legislation.

The Business Report

Lynda Loxton



End of Document