



Key election legislation has still to be passed
IR - News Watch

Key election legislation has still to be passed

Reported on: 20 March 2000

Parliament goes into recess for two weeks from today to allow members to do constituency work in preparation for the upcoming local government elections. 

When Parliament resumes on April 3, the most important Legislation that still needs to be passed concerns the demarcation of municipal boundaries, a prerequisite to the local government elections. 

The legislation includes the Municipal Structures Act that will define the boundaries of the proposed 300 municipal areas. It is important because it will determine the date of the elections, which could take place at any time between November 1 and January 29 next year. Their timing will help the Independent Electoral Commission to complete its plans to print ballot papers, register political parties and individuals who want to stand in the elections, and prepare a voters' roll. 

Parliament also has to pass legislation that will define who will be allowed to vote. 

Earlier this week, the Government said the legislation might allow "certain categories of prisoners" to vote. 

Legislation to protect employees who blow the whistle on public or private sector corruption will also be on MPs' agenda. 

The Protected Disclosures Bill was unanimously approved by Parliament's justice portfolio committee earlier this week. It will be tabled in the National Assembly in the third week of April and is likely be completed by the end of the month. 

The Bill protects employees against victimisation if they disclose information about criminal or irregular activities by an employer. 

Another challenge will be to pass the South African Communications Regulatory Authority that seeks to merge the telecommunications and broadcasting regulatory bodies ­ the South African Telecommunications Regulatory Authority and the Independent Broadcasting Authority. 

Several outstanding budget votes are also likely to be completed during this period which will finalise the amount of money allocated to the various ministries. 

Parliament recesses between April 24 and May 5. It will work until the end of June ­ the end of the first session. 

The Sowetan 

Waghied Misbach 



End of Document