



Botched tender threatens to derail Gama
IR - News Watch

Botched tender threatens to derail Gama 

Reported on: 12 March 2009

A botched R6.5 billion tender for 212 locomotives might prevent Siyabonga Gama, chief executive of Transnet Freight Rail, from becoming the group chief executive of holding company Transnet. 

The state-owned transport utility is looking for a successor to Maria Ramos, who left last month to head financial services group Absa.

Gama, who has worked at Transnet for 15 years, is reportedly a front runner for the top job. During his career at the parastatal Gama has headed its two biggest divisions by assets and revenue. Before being appointed chief executive of Transnet Freight Rail (formerly Spoornet) in April 2005, he was the chief executive of the National Ports Authority.

Gama's knowledge of Transnet's rail and maritime businesses means he is well equipped to fill Ramos's shoes. 

However, as Business Report has reported previously, Gama's record has one serious blot: irregularities in the handling of an unspecified tender, an issue that was noted by Transnet directors at a board meeting last year.

A person present at that meeting told Business Report that although the directors did not say that Gama was responsible for the irregularities, they believed he should have spotted them during the review of the tender.

Business Report has not been able to establish whether the tender cited by the directors is the one for the 212 locomotives but the concurrent timing of Transnet's investigation of the R6.5 billion tender process and the directors' comments points to a link.

In an affidavit in the South Gauteng High Court this week, Transnet's chief financial officer, Chris Wells, who is now the acting chief executive, listed a number of irregularities in the adjudication of the R6.5 billion tender, which resulted in the selection of the Electro-Motive Sibanye joint venture as the preferred bidder. 

These irregularities were discovered when Transnet ordered a review of the tender process after a whistleblower drew attention to possible corrupt links between a Transnet Freight Rail executive and a director of the joint venture.

Gama chaired the acquisition council of Transnet Freight Rail. According to Transnet documents, this council reviews the tender process before making recommendations to the utility's board. 

A forensic investigation by Ernst & Young, commissioned by Transnet, revealed a personal and business relationship between Percival Mosweu, the general manager for capital programmes at Transnet Freight Rail, and Gustav Adams, a director of the Electro-Motive Sibanye joint venture.

Mosweu, who chaired the rail subsidiary's adjudicating steering committee and sat on the acquisitions council, did not disclose his relationship with Adams during the tender review process, Wells said.

The investigation also found that Electro-Motive Sibanye had received the tender documents two weeks before Transnet had issued them. 

Another flaw in the process related to the joint venture being given a much higher black empowerment rating than it qualified for.

Transnet said last week that it had reviewed its procurement processes and taken corrective measures. But it refused to comment on Gama and the discussions at last year's board meeting. 

"Our policy is not to comment on rumour and/or innuendo or to elevate these into a status of fact. We have not previously commented on internal discussions, including deliberations of the board, and we are not prepared to do so now or in future," Transnet spokesman John Dludlu said on Wednesday.

Asked who was liable if there were procedural irregularities during the selection of a preferred bidder, Dludlu said Transnet had a framework setting out the levels of delegated authority to govern decision making and ensure appropriate accountability in the running of the company and its divisions, including the adjudication of tenders. 

Legal and forensic experts contacted this week said that chief executives could not be held responsible for irregularities that occurred while their companies were selecting a preferred bidder for a tender, unless there was overwhelming evidence that they overlooked the flaws and were directly involved in the process.

These experts said, however, that they were not commenting specifically on this case because they did not have all the facts.

Slindile Khanyile

Iol.co.za



End of Document