



No affirmative action cutoff - Mbeki
IR - News Watch

No affirmative action cutoff - Mbeki 

Reported on: 09 September 2005

INCLUDEPICTURE \d \z "http://vne-resource.iol.co.za/27/images/authors/author857"Cape Town - President Thabo Mbeki yesterday rebuffed calls for a cutoff date for affirmative action programmes but reassured all South Africans that they had a place in the new South Africa.

  

The affirmative action and various empowerment initiatives under way were aimed at addressing discrimination against black people under apartheid.

Mbeki agreed that they might have had some negative "unintended consequences", which meant that the programmes had to be constantly reassessed so that corrections could be made.

"It is clear that this is going to be a long and hard struggle" to deal with past inequities.

But in the process, steps had to be taken to reassure those who had left the country after 1994, most of whom had been white, that there was still a place for them in South Africa and that they would be welcomed back.

In one of his periodic question times in the national assembly, he blamed widespread corruption on the lures proffered by market capitalism and its profit motive.

Quoting international financier George Soros, he said one of the major defects of the global capitalist system had been that it had allowed market forces and the profit motive to penetrate areas of society where there was no proper control over them.

The true levels of corruption were difficult to evaluate but it might "be better to overestimate the actual levels of corruption than to underestimate it".

He said this indicated the need for a "strong developmental state" that would ensure that "the institutions, the framework, the values, the system to confront the fight against corruption" were in place.

Overestimation served to "raise the levels of vigilance against corruption", the need for which had been graphically displayed during the Masterbond scandal, which had revealed "an astonishing level of dishonesty and inefficiency" by the auditing profession.

Opposition members supported Mbeki's stand, but said corruption was still costing the country billions of rands a year and was increasing every day at all levels of society, including parliamentarians who tried to hide behind parliamentary privilege.

He said the issue was still largely clouded by a confusion between reality and perception "and we should not go overboard" as there had been a "sustained" campaign against corruption by the state.

MPs said whistleblowers were not being "properly protected against victimisation" and stronger action to protect them was clearly needed.

The Business Report

Lynda Loxton



End of Document