



When does dismissal following resistance to executive power amount to an automatically unfair dismissal?
IR - Editorial

When does dismissal following resistance to executive power amount to an automatically unfair dismissal?

Two employees of SARS, Mashilo and Seremane were dismissed on 02 August 2017 because they declined to accept positions as ‘Domain Specialists during the course of ‘restructuring’. Bain and Company (South Africa) were hired shortly after the appointment of Commissioner Tom Moyane in the latter part of 2014. Mashilo contended that she had been dismissed after having made a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act. She and the second applicant Seremane also contended that their dismissals due to purported operational requirements were automatically unfair. Acting Judge Smanga Sethene agreed and ordered SARS to reinstate them with effect retrospective to the date of their dismissal on 02 August 2017, with full back pay, together with a costs order on an attorney-own client basis.1 The judgment is being appealed.

In essence, the claims were that their dismissals were automatically unfair in terms of section 191(5)(b)(1) of the Labour Relations Act and, in addition, the first applicant’s dismissal amounted to an occupational detriment in contravention of section 3 of the Protected Disclosures Act (PDAA) 26 of 2000 after making a protected disclosure as defined in the Act. 

By way of background: the then Commissioner of the SARS Tom Moyane took office in September 2014. The date of his appointment is not stated in the judgement, but the Nugent Commission of Inquiry into Tax Administration and Governance by SARS2 states that Moyane assumed office on 27 September 2014.3 Bain Inc (South Africa) was appointed by Moyane in December 2014 to review SARS’s operating model.4 It was not disputed that on 18 August 2015 Bain presented the “new structure” to senior officials although it had been prepared in May of that year. According to Mashilo, it was only at the August meeting that she and, apparently, others, first learned of the new structure.

In October 2015, one Jonas Makwakwa had been appointed by Moyane to oversee the review of the operating model and in that month senior managers learned of the new “divisional structures”.5 Mashilo learned at the October 2015 meeting that her position as “Executive: Workplace Wellness” had been phased out of the structure at the executive level. She believed her position had been downgraded. Ms Mashilo wrote to Moyane asking for reasons why her position was to be downgraded. The date of the letter is not disclosed, nor the basis for her opinion that her position had been downgraded. During the period after January 2016, she approached the then Chief Officer Human Resources, Mr Mokoena for a meeting to discuss the new post called a Domain Specialist (this term was identified by Bain). She only met Mokoena in June 2016 and he was not able to enlighten her as to the duties and responsibilities of a Domain Specialist.6 It was not disputed that Mashilo did next to nothing from the identification of the new post until her dismissal in August 2017, although she continued to earn R1,5m per year, plus bonuses. 

On about 31 July 2016 Mashilo came under pressure from Mokoena to consider taking a voluntary severance package (VSP). But, she had already told Mokena that she did not want to be retrenched. The pressure to accept a VSP continued during August and September 2016. On 21 September 2016 Ms Mashilo filed a grievance “with Mr Moyane but was told that during the restructuring process no grievances would be entertained.7 The response she received from Moyane was that “You are required to accept and/or reject the offer on or before the 07 October 2017 [should be 2016]”. Time passed and still Ms Mashilo was none the wiser as to the nature of the position as Domain Specialist; she and others continued to do no work for SARS. “They were not performance assessed. However, they received bonuses”.8 The amount of the bonus/es Mashilo received is not disclosed. 

More than 9 months later, on 31 July 2017, Ms Mashilo emailed a document she entitled “Breaking the Silence” to the then Minister of Finance, Mr Malusi Gigaba and to Mr Yunus Carrim, the Chairperson of the parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance (SCOF), copied to Moyane.9 The document consisted in part some particulars of her personal circumstances and “issues she stated were in the best interest of SARS and the country.” Some of the issues she raised in her missive are what she called Mr Moyane’s unlawful appointment of Bain. No particulars are set forth in the judgment as to the nature and extent of the illegal appointment. She also raised the issue that Domain Specialists were being paid for doing no work for SARS and such was inconsistent with the Public Finance Management Act.”10 She added that in essence her refusal to accept the position of Domain Specialist was that it “was never on any official structure.”11 She felt unduly pressurised into accepting a position that was never explained. This was confirmed in the course of the Labour Court Trial.12 SARS’ version was that the Bain restructuring model had first been prepared in August 2015. As to why this was not explained to the affected staff at the time, is not disclosed. Pertinently, SARS’ undisputed evidence was that 54 employees were not placed in positions within the Bain model. Instead, the 54 were Doman Specialists. Of these, 18 accepted to be placed as Domain Specialists.13 They were all to be retained at their then status with no loss of salary or benefits and they were “encouraged to apply for vacancies within the new organisational structure.14 No explanation is proffered as to what happened to the balance of the staff. 

On 2 August 2017, Ms Mashilo was called to a meeting in Mr Moyane’s office and was told by one Ms Happiness Gama and a Mr Naidoo (their roles in SARS are not explained) that they had instructions from Moyane that she was required to leave the SARS premises immediately. She was given a letter dismissing her, was escorted15 from the premises and was required to hand over SARS property. 

After she was dismissed, Ms Mashilo fell on hard times. She learned of the appointment of the Nugent Commission but she had relocated to Kimberley (the date is not disclosed) and testified that she could not afford to travel to the Commission to testify.16 It is possible that she, along with others could have tendered an affidavit rather than travel (see the Final Report of the Commission, which sets out the particulars of those who tendered submissions on affidavit).

The evidence of the second applicant Ms Seremane was consistent with that of Ms Mashilo, save that she did not contend that she had made a protected disclosure. However, she testified that she unsuccessfully applied for positions and there was talk of her being welcomed in one of the divisions. No explanation was offered why she was not transferred into a meaningful position. As with Ms Mashilo, Ms Seremane’s personal circumstances after she was dismissed were dire. 

Sydwell Phokane testified for the applicants. He had more than 20 years’ service with SARS and in the wake of the Bain ‘restructuring’ he accepted a position as Domain Specialist. He stated that he had been somewhat embarrassed at receiving large bonuses for performance that had not been warranted: R774 000 and was only placed in a meaningful position in June 2019 after the appointment of Mr Kieswetter, the current Commissioner.17

The question arises whether Ms Mashilo made a Protected Disclosure (PDA). In section 1 of the PDA, “disclosure is defined as”

‘any disclosure of information regarding any conduct of an employer, or an employee of that employer, made by any employee who has reason to believe that the information concerned shows or tends to show one or more of the following:

 (a) that a criminal offence has been committed, is being committed or is likely to be committed; 

 (b) that a person has failed, is failing or is likely to fail to comply with any legal obligation to which that person is subject; 

 (c) that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, is occurring or is likely to occur; 

 (d) that the health or safety of an individual has been, is being or is likely to be endangered; 

 (e) that the environment has been, is being or is likely to be damaged; 

 (f) unfair discrimination as contemplated in the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act 4 of 2000); or 

 (g) that any matter referred to in paragraphs (a) to (f) has been, is being or is likely to be deliberately concealed.’ 

Further disclosures made by an employee to his or her own employer is dealt with in section 6(1) of the PDA which provides: 

 ‘(1) Any disclosure made in good faith— 

 (a) and substantially in accordance with any procedure authorised by the employee’s employer for reporting or otherwise remedying the impropriety concerned; or 

 (b) to the employer of the employee, where there is no procedure as contemplated in paragraph (a), 

  is a protected disclosure.’ 

Section 9 also concerns disclosures made by an employee concerning his or her employer to a party other than an employer. It provides that any disclosure made in good faith by an employee who reasonably believes that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it, are substantially true; and who does not make the disclosure for purposes of personal gain, excluding any reward payable in terms of any law; is a protected disclosure if … it is reasonable to make the disclosure. 

The conditions referred to in the subsection are that at the time the employee who makes the disclosure has reason to believe that he or she will be subjected to an occupational detriment if he or she makes a disclosure to his or her employer … [and] that the employee making the disclosure has reason to believe that it is likely that evidence relating to the impropriety will be concealed or destroyed if her or she makes the disclosure to his or her employer; or that the employee making the disclosure has previously made a disclosure of substantially the same information and no action was taken within a reasonable period after the disclosure; or that the impropriety is of an exceptional serious nature.

In determining whether it was reasonable for the employee to make the disclosure, consideration must be given to the person to whom the disclosure is made; the seriousness of the impropriety; whether the impropriety is continuing or is likely to occur in the future … and the public interest. 

This means that an employee needs to have “reason to believe” that the conduct disclosed by the information “shows” or “tends to show” that the listed impropriety “has been” or “is being” or “may be committed in the future”. As Mashilo made the disclosure to people other than her employer, she needed to comply with the provisions of s 9. On any reckoning, a person in the position of Mashilo would have had good reason to believe that she may have been subject to reprisal. But, even if she had “reason to believe” there could have been reprisal or occupational detriment, there is no factual basis to conclude that she disclosed any “information”. What is required is that the disclosure contains “information” as defined. She makes her alleged disclosure on 31 July 2017 two and half years after Bain was appointed. There is nothing in the judgment which goes to show what information she disclosed that was not already in the public domain (nationally) or more privately within SARS that was more than a declaration of Ms Mashilo’s opinion. In order to secure the benefit of PDA protection, there has to be something more than opinion or conclusion. 

We assume, for the purposes of this comment, that the Bain “restructuring” of SARS did not meet any legitimate business purpose and in the fulfilment of its mandate with SARS it acted improperly. This is not the purpose of this comment. Ms Mashilo claims she made a PDA when she sent her “Breaking the Silence” email on 31 July 2017. SARS contends that she did not make a PDA because she included concerns relating to her personal circumstances. The labour court found, unexceptionally, that the applicant’s inclusion of submissions relating to her personal circumstances was not relevant to the determination whether the rest of the document amounted to a PDA.18 Nowhere in the judgment is set forth the nature of her alleged disclosure relating to the illegality of the original appointment. The court adverts to the Nugent Commission about “Bain’s activities at SARS.” The labour court goes on to state that her statement “detailed and disclosed Bain’s unlawful appointment”19 but nowhere is there any information relating to the nature of the illegality of the original appointment of Bain in December 2014. It is not open to an employee claiming protection in terms of the PDAA to conclude that the impropriety of the subsequent conduct of Bain at SARS during the period from 2015 to 2017 meant that its original appointment had been unlawful. There is no information, a requirement to meet the minimum threshold of a General PDA in terms of s 9, that Mashilo made a PDA. Even if she did, there is no evidence about when she acquired the information, which she subsequently disclosed. It is conceivable that she did disclose concerns, but there is on the face of it no factual basis on which the court could conclude that her “Breaking the Silence” amounted to a PDA. Had Ms Mashilo disclosed information in her “Breaking the Silence” that it was not so much the original appointment of Bain that was the impropriety but its enactment of its mandate, whatever that might have been, that was the core problem and that such information fulfilled the requirements of s 9 of the PDAA. This is not such a case. 

Were the dismissals automatically unfair on any other ground? This is not so easily resolved. It was clear to both applicants that SARS wanted them to accept the supernumerary positions and they were reluctant to do so. It is possible that Mashilo’s email of 31 July 2017 and her dismissal on 2 August 2017 were causally connected. But what about Seremane? The court is silent on whether she was simply a trouble and her future was carelessly lumped with that of Mashilo. We leave open the question whether the dismissals were automatically unfair because the applicants refused to accept the supernumerary positions. On the face of it, the applicants were not dismissed for a legitimate and sufficient reason relating to their conduct or capacity or the [legitimate] operational requirements of the undertaking. 

It is hard to understand why Mashilo, with 12 years’ service and Seremane with 8, declined to accept the ‘non-jobs’ that they so disparaged so that they could apply for some other positions, either within SARS or elsewhere. One is also curious about why SARS put up such a tentative defence to the claims.

The judgment makes much of the burden that befell the applicants because they are women. There was no factual basis for the conclusion that the sex of the applicants played any role, let alone that their sex was the proximate cause of their dismissal. The fact that their personal circumstances subsequent to their dismissals were difficult is not relevant to the determination whether the dismissals were automatically unfair. 

A further issue that is not dealt with is the process of this matter. The applicants were dismissed on 2 August 2017. They had 30 days in terms of s 191 of the LRA to refer their dispute about the fairness of the dismissals, whatever the alleged grounds. The referral to the Labour Court was in February 2018 (the date is not stated). For reasons unexplained, there is no determination whether SARS waived the issue of the delay in referring the matter and whether this meant condonation was not required. It was incumbent on the court to raise the issue of jurisdiction mero motu. It does not appear to have done so.

Until next time,

Sarah Christie



Footnotes
1	   Mashilo and another v The Commissioner of South African Revenue Services Case JS 108/18 22 August 2022. On 24 August 2022, SARS noted an appeal against the judgment.
2	   The Terms of Reference were issued on 24 May 2018; the Commission published an Interim Report on 27 September 2018 and its Final Report on 11 December 2018. See http://inqcomm.co.za/ 
3	   Interim Report para 2.
4	   Ibid, para 45. See also Mashilo, para 39.
5	   Mashilo, para 41.
6	   Ibid, para 43.
7	   Ibid, para 47.
8	   Ibid, para 49.
9	   Ibid, para 50.
10	   Ibid, para 51.
11	   Ibid, para 57.
12	   Ibid, paras 12 – 16.
13	   Ibid, para 15.
14	   Ibid, para 18.6
15	   Ibid, para 52.
16	   Ibid, para 54.
17	   Ibid, para 74.
18	   Ibid, para 96.
19	   Ibid, para 97.


End of Document