



New Act will add to police workload
IR - News Watch

New Act will add to police workload

Reported on: 23 October 2000

The implementation of the Protected Disclosures Act, the "Whistleblowers" Act, was expected to reduce the already low rate at which commercial crimes were dealt with by the police, a leading forensic investigator said last week. 

The Act has been passed by Parliament but has not yet been implemented. 

Jean Roux, a partner at Price-waterhouse Coopers in Johannesburg, said while the Act would substantially increase the cases of commercial crime reported to the police, no provision had been made to increase the resources available to the police to handle such cases. 

In the first six months of last year, 30 586 cases of commercial crime, with a total value of R3,5 billion, were reported to the police. In rand terms, this represented an increase of 50 percent on the first six months of 1998. 

In addition to the 30 586 reported cases, some 38 399 were already under investigation by the police in the first half of 1999. 

Within the six­month period, just under 40 percent, or 27 467, of the 69 000 cases being investigated were completed or disposed of with convictions in only 2 350, or 8,5 percent, of those cases. 

No figures have been made available for subsequent periods. 

Roux said despite the recent sharp increase in reported crime, the South African experience was in line with that of other countries at the same stage of development. 

This is a point politicians are keen to emphasise in an attempt to alter negative perceptions. 

At a recent conference held by the Black Management Forum, Bulelani Ngcuka, the national director of public prosecutions, referred to a recent study by the United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, which showed that, on a "lawfulness index", South African business people ranked this country bellow Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Chile, El Salvador, Italy, Zimbabwe and many other countries. 

Ngcuka said local business people reckoned organised crime imposed. a much higher cost in South Africa than in Russia where their counterparts also suffered from similar crime. 

Roux said one of the problems in South Africa was the comparatively low completion rate of investigations. But, he said, the increase in the cases of reported commercial crime could be attributed to the fact that companies were becoming less concerned about the negative perceptions that might accompany a criminal investigation. 

The need to discourage fraud was regarded as much more important than the prospect of unfavourable publicity. 

THE BUSINESS REPORT 

Ann Crotty 



End of Document