



Whistleblower Athol Williams urges uniform handling of corporate misconduct in SA
IR - News Watch

Whistleblower Athol Williams urges uniform handling of corporate misconduct in SA

Reported on: 16 December 2024

Sithandiwe Velaphi

news24

Anti-corruption whistleblower Athol Williams stressed South African authorities need to adopt a consistent approach in dealing with companies found to have committed transgressions in the country. 

Williams, who testified before the Zondo Commission against international consultancy firm Bain & Co, is a former University of Cape Town ethics lecturer and author of the book Deep Collusion: Bain and the Capture of South Africa.

Williams spoke to News24 amid the concerns raised by the Presidency about the appointment of Bain & Co by the Energy Council of South Africa to run its project management office.

The Presidency expressed concerns over the appointment of two disgraced firms - McKinsey and Bain & Co - to crucial partnerships with South African businesses.

McKinsey was appointed as a supporting partner to the B20, a business engagement group that meets on the sidelines of the G20 summit.

Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya said the appointments of the two firms "do not contribute to the engendering of public trust and promotion of good governance, given the well-documented role of the two firms in state capture and corruption".

Williams, in turn, added: "State capture is an assault on our democracy, so it is right that the Presidency enters the fray."

He said he was concerned with the haphazard and inconsistent way of dealing with companies and individuals involved with wrongdoing where some were fined, banned or publicly shamed while others were not. 

In addition to legal action, which appears unlikely, we need a comprehensive non-legal approach to dealing with all companies and individuals involved [in wrongdoing] so that we can achieve some semblance of justice and move on.

"Being haphazard does not serve our pursuit of justice and causes great uncertainty in our economy. I really want to see our government adopt a consistent approach," added Williams. 

News24 reported last week Energy Council of South Africa CEO James Mackay, in a notice circulated to members in October, said the organisation had approached the market to provide a well-capacitated project management office, which was critical to successfully coordinate business support for major energy sector reforms.

The council plays a critical role in solving South Africa's energy crisis, having been mandated by Business for South Africa (B4SA) to lead the administration and coordination of the business response to the objectives and focus areas outlined by the president's National Energy Crisis Committee.

Due to budget limitations, the council requested services for the project management office be provided on a pro-bono basis. Bain was the only provider to give a firm commitment of support to the council on this basis, Mackay added.

news24



End of Document