



Two new public service decisions
IR - Weekly Comment

Two new public service decisions

Two recent decisions of the Labour Court focus attention on some special rules and procedures that apply only in respect of the public service, even though the facts of these two cases are exceptional. 

Tshishonga v Minister of Justice & Constitutional Development & another  (2006) 15 LC 7.22.1  relates to issues such as protected disclosures and the relevance of a criminal conviction in the context of employment. The employee, a deputy director-general of a state department made a number of serious allegations about his employer (the Minister). Disciplinary proceedings followed, but the chairperson of the hearing came to the conclusion that the allegations made constituted protected disclosures in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000, but the employee was still dismissed. The only question that arose in this case (the other issues and merits having been set aside for argument on a later date) was whether the employer (the Department) was bound by the finding of the chairperson that the disclosure was in fact a protected disclosure. 

The point is an important one: if the employer does not agree that the allegations made by the employee constitute protected disclosures, could a second disciplinary hearing be held? Surely this would mean that the employee is being subject to what is called “double jeopardy” — having to face a second hearing for the same offence after having been acquitted at the first hearing. After considering the issues relating to the rules of evidence, the Labour Court chose to resolve the issue by referring to the dispute resolution mechanism established by the Labour Relations Act. The employee was claiming compensation for unfair dismissal and the normal procedure in such a case would be for the dispute to be referred to a bargaining council or the CCMA. The subsequent arbitration proceedings would constitute a new hearing (a de novo hearing) of the matter — neither the bargaining council arbitrator, the CCMA commissioner, or the Labour Court itself, for that matter, would be bound by the decision of the chairperson of the hearing. In other words: in the case of unfair dismissal, an arbitrator or the Court can make up its own mind after having heard the relevant evidence afresh. 

The facts in KZN Provincial Treasury v General Public Service Sectoral Bargaining Council & others  (2005) 15 LC 6.9.2  are interesting but even more exceptional. The Provincial Treasure dismissed a senior official while he was running for election to a seat in the National Assembly: the election took place on 14 April 2004, but he was dismissed on 15 March 2004. The bargaining council arbitrator concluded that his dismissal was unfair. 

The rule in this case is that a member of the National Assembly may not be employed by the state (section  47  of the Constitution of 1996). The Labour Court held that the effect of this rule was not to prohibit a person in the public service from being a candidate for election to the National Assembly — but a public service employee cannot become a member of the National Assembly if he or she remains in the service of the state. That person much exercise a choice: to become a member of the National Assembly or to remain employed by the state. In this case, the employee had clearly chosen to accept election to the National Assembly and it was therefore not possible for the arbitrator to reinstate him. This said, however, it was clear that the employee’s dismissal was premature: he was only required to exercise his choice (and resign from the Department) after he had received a certificate confirming his candidacy in terms of the Electoral Act 73 of 1998. 

The Labour Court agreed with the arbitrator that the dismissal was unfair (even though it disagreed on the issue of reinstatement). The dismissal, the Court held, should not have occurred until the employee’s election to the National Assembly. The Court awarded the payment of remuneration for the period 15 March 2004 to 14 April 2004. 

‘Till next week!

Carl Mischke



End of Document