



Without Filing Complaints, harassed women can't collect from Amtrak for doing nothing
IR - News Watch

Without Filing Complaints, harassed women can't collect from Amtrak for doing nothing

Reported on: 14 October 1999

The sexual harassment decisions handed down by the U.S. Supreme Court at the end of last year's term are proving to be valuable shields to employers with anti-discrimination policies in place by shifting the burden to the plaintiff to show that she availed herself of the protection. 

A plaintiff who didn't lodge a complaint with company management can survive in court only if she shows that the harassment she suffered was so open that management should have been aware of it. 

As a recent opinion in Bishop v National Railroad Passenger Corp. from U.S. District Judge Franklin S. Van Antwerpen illustrates, that burden can be an insurmountable one if the harassed worker made only casual complaints to supervisors, but never lodged a formal complaint or notified upper management. 

The plaintiffs in the suit are three women who worked for Amtrak who claimed they were all harassed by the same man - first-level foreman Larry Platt. 

Each of the women - Lorraine E. Bishop, Doreen Cain and Judy Morris - told similar stories of Platt harassing them by leering at them during work hours and making sexual remarks, such as referring to himself as one woman's "stud muffin." 

In his 38-page opinion, Judge Van Antwerpen outlined each woman's experiences with Platt, noting the dates when Platt's alleged harassing conduct occurred. 

Many of the incidents could not be considered by the court, Van Antwerpen found, because they occurred long before the statute of limitations began to run. 

But Van Antwerpen found that two of the women had properly alleged a "continuing violation" that allowed them to include some of Platt's alleged conduct prior to the limitations period since his pattern of conduct had continued. 

Having isolated the conduct he would consider, Van Antwerpen then turned to the more critical issues in the case - whether the women's allegations truly added up to a "hostile work environment" and whether Amtrak could be held responsible. 

"A hostile work environment claim involves sexual harassment so severe and ubiquitous that it would alter the conditions of a plaintiff's employment and create an abusive working environment," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

Courts analyzing a hostile environment claim, he said, "must examine the totality of the circumstances, including: frequency and severity of the conduct, whether the conduct is physically threatening or humiliating, and whether the conduct unreasonably interferes with an employee's performance at work." 

While neither side disputed that Platt's alleged harassment was "because of" the women's sex, Van Antwerpen found that the work environment could not be considered legally "hostile." 

"We find that the acts we can consider under the time limits imposed by law were neither severe nor pervasive, nor would be sufficiently detrimental to create a hostile work environment. 

At most, during the statutory period, each plaintiff was on occasion made to feel uncomfortable and annoyed," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

"None of Mr. Platt's behaviors toward the plaintiffs altered the terms or conditions of employment, as clearly required for a hostile environment claim." 

In Bishop's case, he said, there were "no threats of physical force -which are not necessary for a finding of sexual harassment but can be an important factor in determining severity." 

Bishop also cannot show that she "suffered unwanted sexual advances, improper touching, insults, unreasonable criticism, the appearance of sexual imagery or pornography, obscene language or gestures, or any significant intrusions of a sexually hostile nature," Van Antwerpen noted. 

Instead, he said, Platt "seems to have succeeded at most in making Ms. Bishop's work environment uncomfortable on occasion, a regrettable but not actionable occurrence." 

Even if Platt's behaviour occurred with some frequency, Van Antwerpen said, "contacts consisting merely of staring, leering, and 'stud muffin' comments, with no physical touching or threats and no sexual overtones, cannot meet the objective test for detrimental effect, however annoying they may be." 

Similarly, Van Antwerpen found that Cain claimed only that Platt made several degrading and offensive remarks to plaintiff and subjected her to harassment of a sexual nature and intimidation. 

"While we do not belittle the discomfort of these isolated instances, 'several remarks' over the course of greater than three years cannot sustain a hostile environment claim," he wrote. 

"We find that a woman in Ms. Cain's position would not have suffered the detrimental effects associated with a hostile work environment. Mr. Platt, during the relevant time period, rarely spoke to Ms. Cain, and when he did, his questions, although allegedly personal, were not sexual in nature," he wrote. 

Morris' allegations also fell short, Van Antwerpen found, because her work and personal life "appear not to be been interfered with at all during the relevant time period. The minor instances of staring and unheard comments would be sufficient to annoy a reasonable woman, but not to affect her psychological well-being." 

AMTRAK LIABILITY 

But even if one of the women had alleged a hostile work environment, Van Antwerpen found that none of them could meet the U.S. Supreme Court's new test for establishing liability on the part of Amtrak. 

"Employers are responsible for behaviour of a co-employee where the plaintiff shows that there was no reasonable avenue for making a complaint, or that the employer knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to respond," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

"Plaintiffs in this case have failed to show either". Amtrak, he said, has proven that it had "an adequate sexual harassment policy and complaint procedure in place during the entire time plaintiffs worked there." 

The company's equal employment policy was posted on bulletin boards by the time clocks that each plaintiff used every day upon arriving for and departing from work, he noted, and Amtrak distributes an EEO Internal Complaint Procedures Handbook, encouraging employees who feel they have been discriminated against to lodge a formal or informal complaint. 

"The plaintiffs were aware or were given many opportunities to become aware of the policy and their right to lodge a complaint against any other Amtrak employee with either the union or management, yet they chose not to avail themselves of the protections Amtrak provided," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

Cain claimed that the women who were harassed by Platt never told any supervisors "because they were afraid nothing would happen," and that women were intimidated because they were working in a "man's environment." 

But Van Antwerpen said "while we do not discredit the legitimate concerns of Ms. Cain about the real difficulties inherent in choosing to be a minority whistle-blower, we find that those fears would be typical to virtually all instances of whistle-blowing, and not particular to Amtrak's working environment." 

And Van Antwerpen found that when two of Platt's other alleged victims did complain formally, the process worked. 

"When Martha Allen filed a complaint in 1996, a thorough investigation by top levels of management ensued. Later that year, another investigation was conducted when Jennifer DeCesare filed a grievance against Mr. Platt. As a result, Mr. Platt was terminated. Clearly, the procedure was sufficient for its purpose," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

Each of the three plaintiffs also failed to show that Amtrak had "constructive notice" of Platt's harassment, Van Antwerpen found. 

"Defendant had no notice of the behavior now complained of until the time when it began its investigation of Ms. Allen's complaint. It then thoroughly investigated plaintiffs' claims and took appropriate remedial action," Van Antwerpen wrote. 

"None of the plaintiffs complained about Mr. Platt to any management-level personnel until the time of the investigation," he added. 

Constructive notice was not established, he found, because "given the short time over which the harassment occurred, the limited instances of interaction, and the fleeting nature of the interactions, Amtrak management had little opportunity to discover the harassment absent plaintiffs giving the company actual notice." 

Shannon P. Duffy 

The Legal Intelligencer 



End of Document