



Cosatu admits to graft in ranks
IR - News Watch

Cosatu admits to graft in ranks

Reported on: 13 November 2015

THE Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) has bemoaned "business unionism" and rampant corruption in its ranks in a frank political report to be discussed at its coming national congress.

It also admits that federation bosses cannot intervene in many instances of corruption because of factional fights in the federation.

Workers’ money, pension and provident funds, medical aid schemes and medical aid funds are being used by some in the labour movement to dispense patronage and advance their own interests.

The admission comes at a time when workers are vulnerable in a volatile environment where retrenchments and job losses should preoccupy union bosses. Corruption and factionalism are some of the reasons cited for Cosatu’s dwindling membership.

The federation’s frank admission clears the way for the issue to be tackled head-on and would make ordinary members feel more confident about whistle-blowing in their unions, says mining and labour analyst Mamokgethi Molopyane.

Many Cosatu-aligned unions are embroiled in factional battles over union resources and investment companies. The federation’s investment arm Kopano ke Matla is also entangled in its own leadership battles and is in the process of being wound up.

The report by acting general secretary Bheki Ntshalintshali paints a dismal picture, saying that in some cases "service to members gets treated as a second priority" in favour of "activities which create possibilities of accumulation".

The report says leadership positions are used to build relationships with business leaders and to pursue a "black economic empowerment-type business unionism".

Money and resources from investment companies and service providers are used to impose preferred leaders in unions.

Some leaders who are in strategic positions with access to investment companies and union monies have "become corrupted by their access to power".

The federation also describes how some unions bankroll other unions to "promote" or "control" them to support their own views in Cosatu’s leadership structure.

The National Union of Metalworkers of SA was accused of this at the height of the factional fight in the federation.

Cosatu will hold its national congress from November 23, when members from across the country will discuss the reports and take decisions on how to turn the situation around.

Business Day

BD Live



End of Document