



Rising costs, rate hikes bring some indigestion
IR - News Watch

Rising costs, rate hikes bring some indigestion

Reported on: 07 January 2008

The fast food sector went through a year of mixed fortunes, with companies reporting growth in their individual results while dealing with various challenges that faced the industry. 

Some of those challenges are expected to continue well into the new year.

Famous Brands and Spur, which are listed on the JSE, had a particularly good year on the performance side.

Spur's net profit for the year to June was up 41.1 percent to R82 million, while Famous Brands' interim profit rose 54 percent to R70 million.

However, Taste Holdings, another listed company, performed below expectations in the half-year to August, as it sold fewer Maxis and Scooters outlets. 

The group opened only nine new outlets in that period, while Famous Brands - which owns Steers, Debonair, Wimpy and FishAways - opened 34 restaurants.

Revenue and profit aside, the real issues for these companies and their unlisted competitors - such as Nandos, Chicken Licken, Mugg & Bean and Retsol - were rising food and fuel prices, interest rate increases and the new minimum wage legislation that was introduced to the hospitality industry.

According to Statistics SA, consumer food price inflation for October was 12.3 percent.

The quarterly food monitor released in November by the National Agricultural Marketing Council said that food prices between October 2006 and October 2007 increased by more than 16 percent.

The Reserve Bank lifted its repo rate to 11 percent last year.

Pierre van Tonder, the managing director at Spur, said: "The last part of 2007 has been an enormous challenge, with the food inflation and the interest rates hikes. The next six months are still going to be tight but we will try to cut our costs accordingly and continue to deliver affordable products to our customers."

The department of labour announced in May that hospitality workers would have to be paid a minimum wage of R1 650, while employers with 10 employees or fewer would pay R1 480 a month. 

The hourly rate for casual workers would be R7.59.

Companies said this legislation had increased their wage bill.

Ben Filmmater, the chief executive at Mugg & Bean, said the company's labour costs rose by 20 percent and it had to cut down staff working hours to avoid job losses.

"The system has also created imbalances, because a guy on the floor is now making a lot more than the guy in the kitchen, yet the guy in the kitchen is the one who actually has a skill," said Filmmater.

There were also a few changes relating to branding. 

Famous Brands revamped the Whistle Blow stores by changing the name to Steers Diners. 

Retsol rebranded the struggling Chicken King business and menus, while Something Fishy introduced chicken to its menus as part of its growth strategy.

Famous Brands bought a 75 percent stake in Wimpy UK for about R41.5 million - an acquisition it said it would use as a stepping stone to expand internationally.

Kevin Utian, the managing director at Nandos, said 2007 was a year with many challenges but also rewards. The grilled chicken company amazed everyone by closing all its branches for one day to celebrate its 20th anniversary and host a big party for its staff members.

With food inflation set to continue, it looks like companies will not be able to avoid passing the cost on to customers with higher prices. 

There should be a great deal of activity relating to black economic economic empowerment deals, as most firms discussed and researched the issue last year.

The number of these restaurants in the townships should also continue to rise, as more companies have realised that there is growth potential in these areas.

Slindile Khanyile

Business Report



End of Document