



MTN whistle-blower not happy with court ruling
IR - News Watch

MTN whistle-blower not happy with court ruling

Reported on: 27 May 2013 

VIOLET Magagane, a former MTN employee who blew the whistle on suspected fraud, has walked away with about R360 000 plus six months worth of her previous annual salary – and MTN has had its reputation cleared of an unfair dismissal charge in the Johannesburg Labour Court. 

This was the outcome of a judgment this month on Magagane’s efforts to have the company reinstate her or provide alternative maximum compensation. She had also asked the Labour Court to grant an order that she be allowed to exercise 7 100 MTN share rights that were awarded to her on June 28, 2010. But the court dismissed this claim. 

The Labour Court ruled, however, that procedurally, her dismissal was unfair as the time frame between when she received her notice of retrenchment and input for alternatives was too tight and unreasonable. It also ordered that the company pay part of her legal costs. 

Magagane, a former senior legal adviser in MTN’s commercial legal department between February 1, 2009, until her dismissal on July 31, 2011, approached the court last year. 

She claimed she was automatically unfairly dismissed and her dismissal was “substantively and procedurally unfair” after she made a protected disclosure on alleged fraudulent payouts of R12 million to a legal services firm by another senior employee in 2010. 

On Friday, she declined to comment and referred all enquiries to her attorney, Levri Modise, who said he was very disappointed by the outcome. “I don’t see how he [the judge] could have arrived at that conclusion. I think this case is very appealable,” he said, but added that his client might not be able to afford an appeal. 

Themba Nyathi, MTN South Africa’s chief human resources officer, said: “MTN South Africa welcomes the ruling by the Labour Court, which found no evidence that Ms Magagane was unfairly dismissed for being a whistle-blower. 

“The ruling affirms our position that MTN is an ethical company that values integrity and fairness, and has zero tolerance for corruption and unethical business.” 

He said the restructuring, during which Magagane was retrenched, had affected 700 employees. MTN said it now considered the matter closed. 

Modise said his client had not yet received the salary payment. She had heard, but MTN had not confirmed, that the company could appeal the judgment handed down on May 17. 

In March 2010, Magagane became aware of invoices paid to Nozuko Nxusani Attorneys by MTN, which were authorised by Robert Madzonga, the chief corporate services officer. She considered the invoices to be irregular. 

Over March and April, she held discussions with other legal advisers within the unit and informal discussions with employees in the business risk management unit about the possibility of making a report anonymously via MTN’s fraud and ethics hotline, which is operated by Deloitte. 

Later Madzonga, the head of her unit, was the subject of a PwC investigation into the matter. MTN never released the findings of a disciplinary hearing into the matter. 

The judge found that Magagane was only able to refer to two facts in support of her contention that Madzonga knew she was a whistle-blower. 

Business Report



End of Document