



Fired CCMA officials demand their jobs back
IR - News Watch

Fired CCMA officials demand their jobs back 

Reported on: 17 August 2010

The two junior officials who were fired at the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for exposing irregular expenditure are demanding their jobs back.

Mothibedi Mokoena, who was axed in February after serving five months on suspension, said last week that he had been "totally vindicated" by auditor-general Terence Nombembe's report, which found that there was R23.6 million in irregular expenditure at the organisation. This included R4.1m for the revamping of the CCMA's website in the last three financial years.

The other axed worker, Nelson Reddy, insisted he was innocent. "I did nothing wrong."

Mokoena said: "I want to get my life, (and) my job back. I have been unemployed since February." He added that his fight with the CCMA should not in any way sully the good work that the organisation continued to do.

Mokoena and Reddy first made allegations early last year that various contracts had been irregularly awarded. 

Mokoena, who briefed Parliament's labour portfolio committee on Tuesday last week, and Reddy, who did not attend the briefing, alleged that there was serious financial mismanagement at the CCMA. 

However, the CCMA said at the weekend that the auditor-general's probe into alleged irregularities had found no evidence of fraud or corruption.

The investigation did find evidence of procedural irregularities in the awarding of tenders worth R23.6m. On Sunday the CCMA said its management had already substantially addressed these irregularities, which were first brought to the attention of the auditor-general's office early last year. 

The irregular expenditure had been reported in two previous annual reports in 2006 and 2007 of the CCMA.

The CCMA plays a key role in defending workers' rights in the workplace and also spearheads the efforts to ameliorate the impact of the economic downturn of the last 18 months

An anonymous document, which was withdrawn by parliamentary labour committee chairwoman Lumka Yengeni from a bundle of documents given to MPs, said there had been corruption in the organisation, but CCMA director Nerine Kahn denied the claims.

Ian Ollis, the DA's labour spokesman, backed up her view. He said he believed that the auditor-general's report did not really vindicate Mokoena and Reddy, finding instead that there was "irregular spending as a result of certain procedural problems. There was no fraud or corruption."

Ollis said there was also doubt about whether the men could be considered whistle-blowers as they had not followed the CCMA grievance procedures adequately.

However, Yengeni wants Nombembe to explain the report to the committee today.

Donwald Pressly

Business Report



End of Document