



Compensation for occupational detriments
IR - Weekly Comment

Compensation for occupational detriments

In December 2006 the Labour Court ordered an employer to pay 12 months’ remuneration for occupational detriments the employee suffered as a result of his making protected disclosures. See Tshishonga v Minister of Justice & Constitutional Development & another  (2006) 15 LC 6.4.2. This decision reached the Labour Appeal Court earlier this year, and the employer, who initially noted 46 grounds for appeal, eventually abandoned them all, except for the ground that the Labour Court was wrong in law in ordering the employer to pay the employee 12 months’ remuneration – see Minister for Justice & Constitutional Development & another v Tshishonga  (2009) 18 LAC 1.11.23. 

The Labour Appeal Court briefly traced the events that gave rise to the case, including the disclosures made by the employee and the disciplinary charges the employee had to face (the employee, in this case, was not dismissed). The Labour Court had to answer a number of questions, including the question whether the disclosures were protected disclosures and whether the employee’s suspension and the disciplinary proceedings constituted occupational detriments for the purposes of the Protected Disclosures Act of 2000. The Labour Court found in favour of the employee and the Labour Court ordered the employer to pay 12 months’ remuneration to the employee. 

The crux of the Labour Appeal Court’s decision in this case is the following:

“[15] In summary, once it has been found that an employee has been subjected to occupational detriment on account of having made a protected disclosure, a court must determine what compensation is just and equitable in the circumstances, which amount is capped at 12 months remuneration. In the present case the judge in the court a quo appeared to conflate the award of compensation with an amount of remuneration. As already noted section 194(4)  of the LRA employs remuneration purely as a means of capping the amount of the award so ordered. By contrast, the court a quo employed remuneration as the basis for the quantification of the award. Accordingly the court a quo erred in its interpretation of s 194(4) of the LRA and this Court is thus at large to determine the appropriate amount of compensation.”

This passage makes for strange reading. Usually, of course, compensation is calculated by reference to an employee’s monthly remuneration. A CCMA arbitrator ordering the payment of six months’ remuneration as compensation is ordering the payment of compensation, and the quantum or amount of compensation is simply being calculated with reference to the employee’s remuneration. For some there may be a “conflation” between compensation and remuneration, but in most cases the employee’s monthly remuneration is simply being used as a formula to calculate “just and equitable” compensation. 

It is clear that the Labour Court did not want to order the employer to pay remuneration. The Labour Court wanted to order the payment of the maximum amount of compensation, which, in terms of section 194(4)  of the LRA, is 12 month’s remuneration. Perhaps the Labour Court did not put it clearly enough, but for most readers, the implications were clear: compensation for the maximum amount. 

Having found that it now had free reign to order compensation afresh, the Labour Appeal Court said that the basis for the compensation would be the R177 000 it cost the employee to defend himself. Taking into account the actions of the employer, especially the vicious and unwarranted attack on the employee by the former Minister of Justice, the Labour Appeal Court took the view that another R100 000 compensation would be sufficient. This meant that the total compensation awarded to the employee was R277 000. And, of course, the employer was ordered to pay the employee’s legal costs. 

‘Till next week 

Carl Mischke



End of Document