



Whistle-blower alleges contract manipulation at Stefanutti unit
IR - News Watch

Whistle-blower alleges contract manipulation at Stefanutti unit

Reported on: 12 October 2011

Listed civil engineering and construction company Stefanutti Stocks had been manipulating its invoices in a mining contract to massage its profits, a former employee has claimed. 

The company’s chief executive, however, denied that there was anything wrong with the invoicing system and said the company was happy with the findings of an internal investigation. 

Vusi Masilela, a site clerk at the company’s earthworks and roads division until his dismissal in March, also alleged that this division had successfully bid for a contract for a road link and had irregularly sub-contracted S & B Civil Roads, a subsidiary of Stefanutti, to do the job. 

He claimed that the division had a contract with Optimum Coal to build a water reclamation plant for the coal producer’s operation in Middelburg at a cost of R200 million. 

Masilela gave Business Report copies of invoices from Stefanutti to Optimum Coal amounting to about R10m, which he claimed were fictitious. 

He said the invoices were for activities that had not taken place at site E129, where he was responsible for monitoring and reporting the site costs. 

He said that he had reported the matter to Stefanutti’s head office in Kempton Park, which responded by creating a ledger which reflected that the costs had been reversed as a result of his alert. However, Masilela had discovered later that the costs had been re-instated in the ledger. 

He said that he had made the discovery when his boss, Adrian Wellcome, came back from the head office and said there was an outstanding R2m between the site cost and the head office cost and Masilela must do the reconciliation between the two costs. 

Masilela said that he had approached the group’s chief executive, Willie Meyburgh, about the matter, who allegedly told him that “at least the money was spent on our own companies rather than external companies”. 

Masilela alleged that cooking of the books at roads and earthworks started in January 2010. 

He was dismissed by the division on March 25 for gross insubordination for failure to carry out an instruction and being absent from work on a regular basis. Masilela claimed that he was absent because he was sick. 

In response to Masilela’s allegations, Meyburgh denied that there had been anything untoward in the invoicing system. 

He said that the invoices in possession of Business Report related to S & B Civil Roads and Stefanutti Stocks Mining, both of which were subsidiaries within the Stefanutti Stocks group. 

Meyburgh confirmed that an internal investigation into the invoices had been conducted and he said Stefanutti was satisfied with the outcome. 

He said it was common practice both within the group and within the construction industry for group companies to work with each other on a contract. 

Meyburgh said the invoices in question did in fact relate to work done between the group firms and were not “ghost invoices”. 

“The invoices actually increase the costs on a contract and cannot therefore increase the contract’s profit to generate additional bonuses,” Meyburgh said. 

Wiseman Khuzwayo

Business Report



End of Document