



The line between protected disclosures and disloyalty
IR - Weekly Comment

The line between protected disclosures and disloyalty

The judgment in Nortje v University of KwaZulu Natal (Case No D858/10, 1 June 2016) is interesting for the light it sheds not only on the protection of whistle-blowers but also on the mutual duty of trust and confidence between employer and employee. The issues are highlighted by the fact that the events played out in the Law Faculty of an institution of higher learning, where the highest standards of lawful and ethical conduct may be expected to prevail. 

However, that was not how Ms Nortje – an administrative assistant in the Faculty – saw it. During 2007 and 2008 she made a series of allegations about irregularities and malpractices in the Faculty to various of her superiors and other office-holders. These included allegations of 

• unfairness in the examination and tutorial systems;

• cheating by students; and

• “corruption” and misconduct on the part of the then Dean and Deputy Dean in the appointment of an unqualified lecturer.

Far from acting on these allegations, the University took the view that they were unsubstantiated and not made in accordance with proper reporting procedures. As a result, disciplinary proceedings were instituted against her and, in October 2009, she was dismissed for misconduct. 

However, as a former Vice-President of the staff trade union and an elected member of Senate and various other University structures, Ms Nortje was aware of her rights. She referred a dispute, claiming that her dismissal was automatically unfair because it was in retaliation for making disclosures in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act (PDA). Alternatively, she claimed that her dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair.

A further accusation emerged in evidence. In 2004, it turned out, Ms Nortje had provided information which led to charges being brought against the previous Dean (implicated in her current allegations) of misrepresenting his academic qualifications. This led to his early retirement and, according to a witness testifying for Ms Nortje, was the reason for the action taken against her. 

But for Ms Nortje the option of early retirement was not available. Her actions were assessed in terms of UKZN’s policy for processing claims by whistle-blowers. While affirming that employees raising concerns in good faith will be protected, the policy also stated that persons making “malicious, vexatious, or false allegations … will be subject to firm disciplinary action” (para 20 of judgment). The essential question, therefore, was whether Ms Nortje’s allegations were true.

Delving into this was no simple matter. No fewer than 31 pages of the judgment are devoted to sifting through and evaluating the evidence of the various witnesses which, as it turned out, raised numerous previous disputes and inquiries in which Ms Nortje had been involved. This included the fact that she had been “redeployed” to the Law Faculty in 2001 after (in the court’s words) “she blew the whistle” on certain appointments in her previous Department (para 8). Clearly, her relationship with the university had not been a happy one. But was her dismissal automatically unfair?

To succeed in this claim, Ms Nortje had to “produce evidence which is sufficient to raise a credible possibility” 1 that she had been dismissed for making a protected disclosure, whereupon the employer would be called on to prove the contrary. And, for her disclosures to be protected, the key question was whether she had “reason to believe” that the information she provided tended to show the misconduct which she alleged.

On balance, the court found that none of the allegations passed the test. Not only were they found to be unsubstantiated; based on her own knowledge the applicant should have known better. And not only was there an absence of good faith; in at least one instance Lagrange J found evidence of bad faith. The evidence, he held, “tended to show that the applicant had played the role of a provocateur who was attempting to stimulate discontent where there was none” (para 98). 

However, the fact that a dismissal is not automatically unfair does not tell us whether it is substantively or procedurally fair. But on this score, too, the court had little doubt. There was no evidence of procedural unfairness, and at least two of the charges against her were so serious as to justify dismissal. As the court put it:

“Quite apart from the inherent disloyalty of her conduct in relation to those charges, there was no prospect of her adjusting her behaviour in my view, especially given her fractious history with the University” (para 105).

In a highly regulated legal environment where disciplinary codes and procedures frequently provide the criteria for judging fairness in dismissal, this is a reminder that the basic common law rules continue to apply. The LRA does not speak of dismissal based on “misconduct” but of “conduct”. The contract of employment implies a mutual duty of trust and confidence between employer and employee which, if violated, may justify the other party in terminating the contract. And if the employee breaches this duty – for example, by an act of disloyalty – it amounts to “conduct” that may entitle the employer to terminate the contract (i.e., dismiss the employee) fairly.

Till next week

Darcy Du Toit.



Footnotes
1	   Para 80, citing Kroukam v SA Airlink (Pty) Ltd [2005] 12 BLLR 1172 (LAC) at 1224.


End of Document