



Jobs-for-cash report delay 'to save lives'
IR - News Watch

Jobs-for-cash report delay 'to save lives'

Reported on 29 March 2016

Johannesburg - The Department of Basic Education has tried to justify the delay in the release of the so-called jobs-for-cash report, claiming it was trying to protect the lives of the whistle-blowers involved.

At the beginning of this month, the DA accused Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga of bowing to internal party politics for her failure to release a report on alleged corruption by some SA Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) members.

Media reports from last year alleged Sadtu members had formulated a scam where officials sold teaching posts, with principal and deputy principal positions being handed over for more than R30 000 each.

This prompted the setting up of a task team appointed by the Department of Basic Education, which provided its findings in a draft report released in December. In a statement released through her spokesman yesterday, however, the minister said she was disappointed at the “repeated misleading statements” by the DA on the report and its release.

Her spokesman Elijah Mhlanga said: “We wish to remind the DA that the investigation has got to do with people's lives, some of which have already been lost. Key to the investigation was the protection of witnesses and whistle-blowers, hence the involvement of the Department of Justice and a forensic team of investigators.”

He accused the official opposition party of using the report for “political point scoring”, saying they should rather focus on the sensitivity of the investigation and the potential danger to the lives of those involved.

Motshekga is scheduled to release the report on April 15, after meeting with the cabinet on April 5, and teachers’ unions and school governing bodies on April 14 and 15, respectively.

Earlier this month, DA spokesman Gavin Davis told the media he believed that delays in releasing the finalised report were a sign that the ruling party was more worried about internal politics than ending the corruption.

“We cannot allow our children’s futures to be compromised by the machinations within the ANC. The DA calls on Minister Motshekga to put our children first and release the Sadtu jobs-for-cash report without delay,” he said at the time.

The Star

IOL NEWS



End of Document