



Another high-profile protected disclosures case
IR - Editorial

Another high-profile protected disclosures case

No-one likes a whistleblower. Even if a whistleblower enjoys protection of the law, the employer, other employees and managers may never really trust an employee who has made certain disclosures. Even though they may be doing the right thing, employers and managers would always prefer that an employee disappear (resign) and leave them in peace to deal with the fall-out of the disclosures. 

There is another practical consideration: our Courts, most notably the High Courts, go to considerable lengths to afford whistleblowers the full protection of the law: to stop disciplinary proceedings before they happen by means of an interdict or even to reinstate an employee that has been dismissed in the context of the employee’s having made protected disclosures. But no matter what the High Court says or does, the first principle holds true: no-one likes a whistleblower; and employers like whistleblowers even less when they have been compelled by a Court to reinstate that employee. 

Practically, perhaps the best approach for a whistleblower is to blow the whistle and run as fast and as far as he or she can. The chances of workplace relationships returning to anything even vaguely resembling normality are slim: people will always wonder about the whistleblower, whether he or she can be trusted with the company’s secrets. A whistleblower that has been reinstated by a Court under the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000  may soon find himself or her self marginalised, left out of business processes, not called to meetings, not involved in new plans. Clearly, this is not supposed to happen, but, unfortunately, this is the way it often happens. 

The important point is that the law reports we get to read do not reflect the tensions, the strains, the pressures and the human drama that characterise these situations. They do not reflect the fact that almost invariably factions are built: those against the whistleblower and those employees who support the whistleblower nor do they reflect the fact that a whistleblower needs a fair amount of courage to speak out, knowing full well that he or she will not be a popular employee after the disclosure. 

The High Court’s jurisdiction

By now it seems well-established that the High Court has jurisdiction when it comes to matters under the Protected Disclosures Act (the PDA). In March 2009, the Eastern Cape High Court in Port Elizabeth heard an urgent application brought by the employee, the chief financial officer of the employer – the case is Young v Coega Development Corporation (Pty) Ltd (1)  (2009) 18 HC 1.1.1. There are two decisions of the High Court relating to this matter: the first decision focuses on issues of jurisdiction. 

The employer, Coega, had instituted disciplinary action against the employee; the notice of the hearing was signed by the chief executive officer. The employee, through his attorneys, objected, saying that he would seek relief under the PDA. When the disciplinary enquiry started, the employee asked for a postponement for the court action under the PDA could be concluded. The chairperson of the enquiry refused, but he did grant the employee a postponement so that the employee could bring this urgent action in the High Court. The employee applied for an interdict stopping Coega from proceeding with the disciplinary enquiry until the full action he had instituted earlier had been completed (in the main action he had instituted earlier the employee asked for a declaratory order that the charges against him would be an occupational detriment as defined in section 1  of the PDA).

The first question the High Court was required to deal with was a challenge to its jurisdiction: it was argued, on behalf of the employer, that only the Labour Court had the necessary jurisdiction in cases such as these. The High Court dismissed this argument, saying, first, that an employee is entitled to approach the Labour Court, but the employee is not obliged to approach only the Labour Court. The High Court also focused a lot of attention on section 4  of the PDA, specifically section 4(1)(a)  which contains words referring to “any court having jurisdiction including the Labour Court”. The High Court also considered some of its own earlier decisions in support of its conclusion that it did have jurisdiction. 

The disclosures and the employer’s response

There was no dispute that the chief financial officer, the employee, made a number of disclosures relating to “impropriety” in the employer’s affairs, and, by doing so, he implicated the chief executive officer. The employee had made a number of disclosures. The first related to “unbudgeted expenditure” – that the chief executive officer had incurred liability on behalf of the employer despite the fact that these expenditures had not been budgeted for. The employee said that he was obliged to report this in terms of the applicable Treasury Regulations and it also appeared to him that the transaction would contravene the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999. 

Two further disclosures related to the chief executive officer’s trust. There was, for instance, an apparently irregular claim for VAT on services rendered by the trust to Coega: the trust was allegedly not registered as a VAT vendor. The third disclosure related to the chief executive officer’s trust to make payment of income tax on the services it rendered to Coega. Especially the latter allegation referred to a very messy situation, where the SA Revenue Service required the employer to pay about R1.2 million – this amount should have been deducted from payments that had been made to the trust. The chief executive officer had undertaken to pay his indebtedness to the employer, but failed to keep up his side of the agreement. 

The employer raised a number of arguments in respect of the disclosures. The first argument was that the employee had not made the disclosures in good faith. The employer said, for instance, that charges had been laid against the employee, and performance issues had also been raised, by the time the disclosures had been made. This meant, the employer argued, that the employee had made the disclosures in order to avoid those charges. the Court rejected this argument, saying that the employer was confusing an alleged motive on the part of the employee with the employee’s intention. Furthermore, the employee was contesting the allegations made against him and had made a number of statements in support of his response to those charges. But the Court could not decide this issue on the papers before it. 

In cases such as these an employer will often try to argue that the disclosures made are not protected under the PDA. The Court rejected these arguments as well and found that the employee had established that the institution of the disciplinary enquiry flowed from the disclosures he had made. The disciplinary proceedings were a reprisal for the disclosures the employee had made. The employee had proven the unlawfulness of the intended disciplinary enquiry and the Court made an order interdicting the employer from proceeding with the disciplinary enquiry against the employee, pending the determination of the employee’s claim in the main case. 

Why should we listen to the High Court?

Usually, an employer who has had an order of this nature made against it will take stock of the situation, reconsider its alternatives, and perhaps find other ways of dealing with the matter. Not in this case, however. Young v Coega Development Corporation (Pty) Ltd (2)  (2009) 18 HC 11.5.1 is a continuation, in essence, of the same dispute, and the employer’s approach is instructive – in a negative sense. 

The interdict in the first case was granted on Friday, 20 March 2009. The following Monday, 23 March 2009, the employer decided to end the employee’s services with immediate effect. Again the employee found himself having to rush to the High Court on an urgent basis, and again the High Court found itself having to protect the employee against an employer that appeared determined to rid itself of the employee at all costs. 

So, what happened? On the Friday, 20 March 2009, after the interdict had been issued by the High Court, a lunch hour meeting was held. All members of staff were addressed by the chief executive officer, and the chief executive officer said that it was neither the practice nor the policy of the employer to act against any staff member who made a protected disclosure. The chief executive officer used the opportunity to deny the allegations made against him and explained that the employee’s suspicions as to why he had been charged were false. The disciplinary action, said the chief executive officer to the staff, were the result of “well known” problems in the finance department. 

On Monday, 23 March 2009, the employee received a memorandum circulated by the chief executive officer to all members of the Executive Management Committee (EXMA). EXMA included all six executive managers, including the employee, Mr Young. In this memorandum the chief executive officer indicates that there were issues relating to the financial management of the organisation. He set out his concerns and said that because of the allegations made against him by Mr Young, he wished to recuse himself from dealing with any issues relating to Mr Young’s performance. He accordingly delegated the responsibility for dealing with these issues to EXMA. 

Mr Young, the employee, was called to an EXMA meeting and the meeting was to deal with “matters relating to the performance of the CFO”. In other words, this meeting was to be about his performance and the alleged poor performance issues the chief executive officer had raised. The employee attended the meeting, went through the issues raised one by one and explained to EXMA where matters stood. He had no idea that he was in fact attending his own disciplinary enquiry that would lead to his dismissal. 

According to one manager who was present, there could have been no doubt in Mr Young’s mind as to the seriousness of the situation as well as his responsibility for creating the mess and cleaning up the financial chaos. He was being called upon to do more than simply take EXMA through the steps that had been taken. According to this manager, the members of EXMA were dissatisfied with Mr Young’s explanations concerning the chief executive officer’s complaints. Again, it was said, the employee had yet again failed to produce the required reports and budgets on time.

Mr Young was given an opportunity to suggest a way forward, but he became offensive and refused to acknowledge the seriousness of the situation or his responsibility for the situation. He was then asked to address EXMA on why his services should be retained; he became confrontational and he told EXMA that it was powerless to do anything against him because of the interdict issued by the High Court the previous Friday. This was ill advised of the employee, of course, and he did concede that he may have said things that were not thoroughly thought-out. But he added that he was in a state of shock at the turn of events and that he was not aware during the meeting that he was in fact in a disciplinary enquiry. Eventually one of the members of EXMA proposed that Mr Young’s services be terminated; after a brief adjournment the meeting reconvened and Mr Young was informed that he was dismissed. The following day (24 March 2009) he received a letter confirming his dismissal. The letter focused on allegations of poor work performance and outlined a number of specific instances of alleged poor work performance. 

What the employer said this time around

The employer’s first point was to again challenge the High Court’s jurisdiction. Again, the High Court takes this challenge seriously, and deals with each of the aspects raised by the employer. The employer’s second point was to argue that there was no urgency in the matter. The High Court dismissed this argument as well, saying that the employee’s allegation was that his dismissal flowed from his having made disclosures and that the action taken against him was an attempt to circumvent the interdict the High Court had granted earlier. The very nature of these allegations, said the Court, makes the matter an urgent matter.

The employee’s argument was that the action taken against him was nothing but a continuation of the previous unlawful action the employer had taken against him, that the dismissal was nothing more than a further reprisal on account of the disclosures he had made and that the employer, having been interdicted from taking disciplinary action against him, resorted to take the poor performance route in order to avoid compliance with the interdict. 

The Court found that there was considerable merit in the employee’s submissions, and said that the employer could not really argue that the employee’s alleged misconduct was of such a nature that it warranted summary dismissal without compliance with the employer’s disciplinary code. The employee was entitled to a fair hearing with all the procedural safeguards, including that he receive a formal written notification outlining the allegations of misconduct against him.

Correctly, the employer raised the argument that when it comes to senior managerial employees, a less extended process may be followed, that senior employees are expected to know that they are not performing adequately and that the only requirement is that the senior manager be given an opportunity to respond to the allegations against him. These arguments have, after all, been raised in a number of other cases. The High Court said that even if there was a difference in the form of the enquiry for senior managers, the fact remains that even the committee-type enquiry must comply with certain basic standards of fairness. In this case, the process was flawed:

 “In the present matter the respondent gave the applicant no notice whatsoever of the contemplated action against him. Its conduct in undertaking what was in essence a disciplinary hearing under the guise of being an EXMA meeting was manifestly unfair and prejudicial to the applicant and was in flagrant breach of the applicant’s contractual rights the so-called agenda (MM3) gave no indication whatsoever that the meeting was to be anymore than a discussion of the applicant’s performance. Indeed, it states in specific terms that the meeting ‘is meant to dismiss’ those issues. In these circumstances, the applicant’s astonishment at the turn of evens is fully understandable. As submitted by Mr Beyleveld, who appeared for the applicant, the meeting amounted to nothing less than an ambush of the applicant.”

The High Court blasts the employer for the action it took:

 “In my view, the only plausible inference to be drawn from the unseemly haste with which the respondent proceeded against the applicant in the manner in which it did, following upon the granting of the interdict, is that it wished to obviate the possibility of the applicant again successfully applying for an interdict. Its infringement of the applicant’s rights on the first working day after that interdict had been granted was so blatant that the inference is, in my view, inescapable that it was determined, come what may, to terminate his services in such a manner as would not afford the applicant the opportunity of obtaining prior legal redress. Its irrational conduct in acting in the manner in which it did would, in the normal course of events, be inexplicable. Viewed in the context of what had preceded such conduct, however, it becomes clear, in my view, that it acted as it did in reprisal for the disclosures made by the applicant.”

The High Court found that the employee had established that the action taken against him was indeed a continuation of the previous unlawful action and that it was still a reprisal for the disclosures he had made. This left the issue of remedy, and the employer’s representative argued strongly against reinstatement. It was argued on behalf of the employer that it would be untenable for the employer to continue with an employment relationship with Mr Young in the circumstances where all trust had been blasted out of the water. It was also said that the employer was planning to institute action against Mr Young for the recovery of about R7 million allegedly caused by his misconduct. It was also said that the chief executive officer was going to take legal action against Mr Young for defamation. 

But the Court said that the objects of the PDA would be frustrated if the employee was not reinstated. Once an employee had established that he or she had been subjected to an occupational detriment in contravention of the PDA, he or she must be entitled to full protection by the Court, and this would include reinstatement. The High Court declared the employee’s dismissal invalid and ordered his reinstatement with immediate effect on the same terms and conditions that applied before his dismissal. The Court also ordered that the employer be interdicted and restrained from subjecting the employee to any further occupational detriment as defined in the Protected Disclosures Act. 

Carl Mischke

June 2009



End of Document