



Air Quality Bill will cost big polluters many millions
IR - News Watch

Air Quality Bill will cost big polluters many millions

Reported on: 12 August 2004

Cape Town - The department of environmental affairs and tourism presented a revised Air Quality Bill to parliament yesterday with director-general Chippy Olver saying heavy polluters would have to spend "many millions of rands".

  

Olver said he expected that the bill would result in "dirty" industries having to reduce their noxious emissions, especially in the Vaal Triangle, Durban South, Secunda and Milnerton areas.

Refineries and associated industries were concentrated in these areas and were often blamed for pollution, which had adverse effects on the health of nearby residents.

Even the oil industry, which had already invested heavily in cleaning up emissions, would have to invest more to meet the emission restrictions in the bill, Olver said.

Concerns remain, however, among members of the portfolio committee on environmental affairs and tourism and lobby groups about the capacity of the department to monitor compliance and prosecute offenders.

Olver said the bill took into consideration all the concerns raised during public hearings, including the department's capacity to monitor and take offenders to court. 

He said it had been proposed that industries pay an annual fee, to be set in regulations gazetted after the bill was passed, to beef up the capacity of the authorities to implement the bill.

Anton Moldan, the environmental adviser to the South African Petroleum Industry Association, said afterwards that refineries were "on track" in meeting the new requirements and had already reduced their harmful emissions by 60 percent at great cost.

Oil companies were aware, however, that they would have to spend more on emission control as they were committed to improving the quality of the environment in the "hot spots" identified by Olver.

Olver said that the revised bill contained more clarity on a number of issues of concern.

In particular, discretionary powers by the minister or department to enforce regulations had been made mandatory to ensure compliance. 

Clarity and coherence had been provided on transitional and licensing arrangements, and recognition would be given to whistle-blowers.

The Business Report

Lynda Loxton



End of Document