



Making disclosures
IR - Weekly Comment

Making disclosures

An employee making a protected disclosure is protected against dismissal. But this assumes, of course, that the “disclosure” made by the employee falls within the ambit of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000. This was the issue in the recent award of Gama / Checkers Hyper (2006) 15 CCMA 2.4.1. The employee was dismissed for bringing the employer’s name into disrepute and for making false statements to the Department of Labour. 

The problem arose when the employee, upon returning to work after sick leave, presented a note from a traditional healer — but the employer refused to pay the employee for the period of sick leave because the traditional healer concerned was not a registered traditional healer. In terms of the employer’s policy, the employee did not qualify for paid sick leave in this case. The employee was not satisfied with this explanation. 

She then approached the Department of Labour and made a number of allegations, including the issue of her sick leave, but also issues relating to overtime pay and annual leave. The employee also claimed that these issues did not affect her only, but that other employees were also affected. The employer’s witness gave evidence to the effect that the complaints were not genuine and that the employee was enjoying all benefits to which she was entitled. The employee failed to show that other employees were suffering the same fate — she failed to call these employees as witnesses in the arbitration and failed to provide documentary proof. The arbitrator concluded that this was not in fact a collective referral of a complaint to the Department of Labour. 

An inspector from the Department of Labour had visited the store as part of the investigation but he could not find anything wrong with the employer’s policies or employment practices. The employee was informed of this, and she then approached yet another inspector. The second inspector, upon hearing of the outcome of the first inspector’s investigation, did not continue with the investigation. 

The CCMA commissioner concluded that the discontinuation of the investigations suggests that the employee’s complaints were groundless. It was common cause between the parties that the employee had made some of the allegations to the Department of Labour without addressing her grievances with the employer and/or the shop stewards. 

This left the question of whether the employee’s actions constituted a protected disclosure. Section 3 of the Protected Disclosures Act provides that no employee may be subjected to any occupational detriment by his or her employer on account (or partly on account) of having made a protected disclosure. The definition of “occupational detriment” in section 1 of the Act includes dismissal. The question was, therefore, whether the employee’s complaint to the Department of Labour constituted a protected disclosure for the purposes of section 3.

The CCMA commissioner finds that in this case the employee’s “disclosure” was made in bad faith and that it had the effect of bringing the employer’s name into disrepute. The dismissal (which was also found to be procedurally fair) was upheld. 

It seems right, of course, but there is just one problem. Section 187(1)(h) of the Labour Relations Act provides that a dismissal in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act constitutes an automatically unfair dismissal. And in terms of section 191(5)(b) disputes about allegedly automatically unfair dismissals must be referred to the Labour Court (and not the CCMA). The question is therefore whether the CCMA had jurisdiction to hear this matter?

‘Till next week

Carl Mischke



End of Document