



Looking back at 2009
IR - Editorial

Looking back at 2009

Perhaps 2009 was not that momentous a year as far as developments in labour law are concerned. While we did have some decisions from the Constitutional Court, they were by no means as ground-breaking as those we saw in 2007 and 2008. For some this may mean that there has been no real and fundamental change to the direction of labour law, and, to a certain extent, this is true. For the most part, what we’ve seen are a number of small and gradual changes, but some having profound practical implications for many employers. 

Suspensions

Small but important developments have taken place in the Labour Court. For many employers, the new rules regarding suspensions will cause a re-think perhaps before they simply dismiss an employee. The relevant decision here is Mogothle v Premier of the North West Province & another  (2008) 17 LC 11.5.4 .This is what the Labour Court said about suspensions:

 “[39] In summary: Each case of preventative suspension must be considered on its merits. At a minimum, though, the application of the contractual principle of fair dealing between employer and employee, imposing as it does a continuing of fairness on employers when they make decisions affecting their employees, requires first that the employer has a justifiable reason to believe, prima facie at least, that the employee has engaged in serious misconduct; secondly, that there is some objectively justifiable reason to deny the employee access to the workplace based on the integrity of any pending investigation into the alleged misconduct or some other relevant factor that would place the investigation or the interests of affected parties in jeopardy; and, thirdly, that the employee is given an opportunity to state a case before the employer makes any final decision to suspend the employee.”

These are important new requirements, especially the third requirement, namely that the employee must be heard before the employer makes a final decision to suspend the employee. This means that suspensions have now become complicated and subject to considerations of procedural fairness. It means that even if an employee is to be suspended in order for the employer to conduct an investigation, the employee must be heard. It also means that the employee will now have to be heard more than once: a hearing before the suspension and a hearing after the suspension (the disciplinary enquiry). Was it necessary to overburden the suspension by creating these new rules? 

Protected disclosures

Protected disclosures continue to make news and to lead to litigation. Most notable in 2009 were the two decisions in Young v Coega Development Corporation (Pty) Ltd (1)  (2009) 18 HC 1.1.1 and Young v Coega Development Corporation (Pty) Ltd (2)  (2009) 18 HC 11.5.1.Naturally, the High Court has to deal with the question of its own jurisdiction, but it finds that the occupational detriments to which the employee would have been subjected would have been in contravention of the Protected Disclosures Act of 2000 and the employer was accordingly interdicted. The employee obtained the interdict on a Friday afternoon; the Monday morning, he is summoned to a meeting of the executive management committee to answer questions about his performance. He was dismissed there and then, the employer now claiming that it dismissed him because of the performance problems. The High Court took a different view, said that the employee’s dismissal was invalid, and reinstated him. 

The never-ending story of administrative action

What we have seen this year (and there will be more about this early in 2010 here on IRNetwork) are a number of decisions from the Supreme Court of Appeal relating to the borders between labour law and administrative law. When is a matter a “labour matter”? When does the Labour Court have jurisdiction over a matter, and when does the High Court have jurisdiction over the matter?

Here at the end of the year it is hardly necessary to deal with each and every one of these decisions again, but they are still worth listing for the sake of convenience. In Makhanya v University of Zululand  (2009) 18 SCA 1.11.1 the Supreme Court of Appeal essentially gutted the decision of the Constitutional Court in Chirwa v Transnet Ltd & others  (2007) 16 CC 1.1.1,concluding that the Chirwa decision was of very limited force and effect. In Transman (Pty) Ltd v Dick & another  (2009) 18 SCA 1.11.2 the Supreme Court of Appeal seemed to go the other way, in effect supporting the Constitutional Court’s view and limiting employees’ remedies. 

Is this the end of the matter? By no means. There is still a lot more to come when we deal with some of the latest Constitutional Court decisions early in 2010.

New rules regarding theft?

The decision of the Labour Appeal Court in Shoprite Checkers v CCMA & others  (2008) 17 LAC 8.8.1 caused quite a stir. And for good reason. All along, we had assumed that there is no real question when it comes to an employee’s stealing the employer’s property – that dismissal would almost invariably be the appropriate sanction. The furore was caused by the Labour Appeal Court’s suggesting that a long period of service and clean disciplinary record may mean that dismissal is not appropriate. It also strangely seems that all of a sudden the value of what the employee stole (food, in this case) now becomes a pertinent consideration. How long this case survives and whether or not it will be followed in practice are completely different questions. 

What’s ahead?

Well, there is no guessing what 2010 holds in store as far as labour law developments are concerned. By now we know that some of the topics we will be discussing early on in the new year will be the new rules relating to strike notices and the newest decisions from the Constitutional Court. Apart from that, we’ll watch carefully to see what themes and topics emerge, and to alert you to the most important new developments, as and when they happen. 

Happy holidays. From the whole IRNetwork editorial team.

December 2009



End of Document