



Blowing the whistle?
IR - Weekly Comment

Blowing the whistle?

16 July 2004

One of my trusted spies told me an interesting story recently. In a large organisation, a number of employees had become increasingly dissatisfied with what they perceived as being nepotism and corruption in the recruitment practices of the company. They held the view that the managers running the organisation were selecting friends and relatives for lucrative positions and that tenders and other contracts were being dished out in a completely irregular manner. 

While virtually all senior appointments, in virtually any organisation or company, will attract some discussion amongst other employees, the employees in this case decided to spread the news — the gossip and issues spread around the organisation like wildfire, and, inevitably, a newspaper commentator got wind of the story. Some semi-discreet calls and meetings between disgruntled employees and the media followed, inevitably followed by a pointed and sarcastic piece in a newspaper. 

Naturally, the powers that be, from the Chairman of the Board to the Chief Executive Officer and even line managers were furious when they read about these allegations in the newspapers and all hell broke loose. The Chief Executive Officer proceeded to compose an aggressive e-mail (sent to everyone in the organisation) threatening to come down like a ton of bricks on any employee found communicating with the media without consent.

In turn, the disgruntled employees were furious — they took the view that they had acted in the best interest of the organisation by blowing the whistle on what they perceived as being corrupt managerial practices. They claimed that, by communicating with the media, they were making protected disclosures in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000.

The question that arises at this point is whether the employees, by communicating with the media, have made a protected disclosure in terms of the Protected Disclosures Act. Section 6 of the Protected Disclosures Act provides that a disclosure made in good faith and substantially in accordance with the relevant procedures will be a protected disclosure. If there is no procedure, an employee must make a disclosure to the employer. This section goes on to provide that an employee who, in terms of a procedure authorised by his or her employer, makes a disclosure to a person other than his or her employer, is deemed, for the purpose of the Protected Disclosures Act, to be making the disclosure to the employer. This means, for instance, that if the employer provides a ‘fraud-line’ or other reporting system (irrespective of whether the reporting is to an internal official or employee or to an external person) or where the employer provides some other procedure for reporting improprieties, an employee must follow these procedures in order to enjoy the protection of the Act. 

Also relevant in this regard is section 9 of the Protected Disclosures Act: a section that provides that disclosures made in good faith by an employee will be a protected disclosure if the employee reasonably believes that the information disclosed is substantially true and if the employee does not make the disclosure for the purposes of personal gain (excluding any reward payable in terms of any law). But there are a number of important conditions set out in section 9(2) — only if these other conditions are also complied with, will the disclosure be protected. 

Not every disclosure made by an employee will be a protected disclosure (see Communication Workers Union & another v Mobile Telephone Networks (Pty) Ltd (2003) 12 LC 1.16.2). Given the facts outlined above, it is highly unlikely that the disgruntled employees in this company in effect made a protected disclosure by communicating allegations (which may or may not have been true) about alleged improprieties in the company to the media. If the employer does decide to institute disciplinary steps against those employees, it may mean that the employees are not protected by the Protected Disclosures Act. 

‘Till next week!

Carl Mischke



End of Document