



Travelgate whistle-blower wins leave to appeal axing
IR - News Watch

Travelgate whistle-blower wins leave to appeal axing

Reported on: 13 September 2011

The Travelgate scandal refuses to go away, having now been refuelled by the decision of the Supreme Court of Appeal on Friday that a whistle-blower in the saga is entitled to challenge his dismissal by Parliament. 

Now Parliament would have to settle with Harry Charlton or face him at a trial at the Labour Court, his lawyer, John McRobert of Herold Gie Attorneys in Cape Town, said on Friday. 

This flies in the face of a pronouncement by Max Sisulu, the Speaker of the National Assembly, on August 30 that the so-called Travelgate saga – where MPs used their travel allowance vouchers for illegal purposes, including renting fast cars – was officially over. 

Sisulu said an opinion by senior counsel had concluded that there were “limited prospects” of successfully claiming back R12 million that was still missing. 

This was after Sisulu had complied with the judgment of the Grahamstown High Court ordering Parliament the release the names of 89 MPs who were implicated in the scandal, following an application by the Public Service Accountability Monitor (PSAM). 

Charlton was dismissed as the chief financial officer of Parliament in 2006, ostensibly on the grounds of work-related misconduct. 

He, however, insists that he was dismissed for blowing the whistle on travel voucher fraud committed by MPs. 

Charlton says the revelations he made were protected under the Protected Disclosures Act. 

In his statement of claim, Charlton says that in about December 2002, he informed the incumbent secretary to Parliament, Sindiso Mfenyana, of the discovery within the financial management office of improper travel benefit claims by MPs. With Mfenyana’s approval, Charlton investigated the matter further. 

In April 2003, he says he submitted a written report to Parliament (represented by Mfenyana and senior presiding officers of Parliament) stating that there was prima facie evidence of fraud having been perpetrated on Parliament. 

Charlton says he remained actively involved in pursuing the matter further and the SAPS, the Scorpions and the National Prosecuting Authority were roped in to investigate. 

After the 2004 elections, the previous senior presiding officers left and Zingile Dingani replaced Mfenyana as secretary. 

According to Charlton, from the time of Dingani’s appointment, Parliament’s support for the investigation declined. 

For example, Charlton reported to Dingani that another dimension to the travel fraud had been identified, which would involve an increase in Parliament’s total likely claim from R16.5m to R35.7m, and which would implicate prominent current members, former members and office bearers. 

Charlton says Dingani effectively frustrated the conduct of a proper investigation of the second fraud by, among other things, not making available to him external resources required for such an investigation. 

Another example given by Charlton is that Dingani was allegedly in possession of prima facie evidence that certain ministers and other high-ranking officials were also implicated in the fraud but he failed to have this investigated. 

Parliament claimed that MPs were neither “employees” nor “employers” for the purposes of the Protected Disclosures Act, and thus his dismissal was not automatically unfair in terms of the Labour Relations Act. 

The Labour Court dismissed this exception but allowed Parliament to appeal to the Labour Court of Appeal, where it succeeded with the exception. 

The Supreme Court of Appeal, on appeal by Charlton, held that it was established law that the dismissal of an exception was generally not appealable. This was because the order was not final in effect as there was nothing to prevent an aggrieved party from raising and arguing the same issue at the trial. 

Leave to appeal should not have been given by the Labour Court and the Labour Court of Appeal ought to have struck Parliament’s appeal from the roll. 

The jobless Charlton now lives in Australia. The judgment was welcomed by the PSAM. 

Its spokesman, Jay Kruuse, said: “The public has a lot to thank Charlton for. The fact that he had to take all these steps is regrettable. This is further evidence of the unwillingness of Parliament to deal with the matter and bring it to its conclusion.” 

Wiseman Khuzwayo

Business Report



End of Document