



Media, labour find common enemy in planned secrecy bill
IR - News Watch

Media, labour find common enemy in planned secrecy bill

Reported on: 24 June 2011

There is often no love lost between the labour movement and the media. Especially during times of acrimonious industrial disputes and strikes, trade unions feel they usually get the raw end of the publicity stick. But the labour movement and the media are united now in their opposition to the Protection of Information Bill that the ANC seems determined to force through Parliament. 

Not that the unions have leapt to the defence of the media. For the most part, the labour movement recognises that the media is merely the medium conveying messages that are sometimes distorted by the prism of commercial interest; that it is, fundamentally, a megaphone through which messages of public interest can be magnified. 

And it is the wider public interest that remains supreme in the philosophy of democratic trade unionism. It is recognised that without transparency and open debate workers, and the communities from which they come, can be manipulated and dominated by forces hostile to an egalitarian society. 

So it is not primarily to the defence of the existing media that the labour movement has rallied in condemning the Protection of Information Bill. It has rallied to the cause of the public at large and to those whistle-blowers in corporations public and private whose information helps to hold to account the crooks and conspirators. 

This is why the labour movement has declared its opposition to what is seen as an assault on the constitutional rights of all South Africans. It is summed up in the ancient slogan, repeated recently by National Union of Mineworkers general secretary Frans Baleni: nothing about us, without us (having all the available information). 

Trade unionists are quick to point out that politicians are our elected representatives. As such they are employed to do our bidding and to report to us; not to do secret deals behind our backs, often to their own great benefit. 

“The inclusion in the bill of commercial secrets is also worrying,” Confederation of SA Worker Unions general secretary Khulile Nkushubana says. “Who profits?” he asks. “And if something is in the public interest, what have they got to hide?” 

Of special concern to the labour movement is the fact that it is trade union members who are often at the forefront in exposing corruption and problems of service delivery in both the public and private sectors. And it is to the media, for all its faults, that the unions must turn when complaints and inquiries through designated official channels are stymied or whistle-blowers are victimised. 

According to unions in local government, there have already been victimisations aplenty. 

“Around the country, there have been more than 2 500 shop stewards and workers who have been unfairly suspended or dismissed,” SA Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu) spokesman Tahir Sema says. 

He says many of these cases relate to workers who either questioned or complained about apparent corruption and mismanagement. For more than a year, these complaints went unheeded and victimisation continued until, in May, Samwu decided to call a strike in protest. 

But that was just before the local government elections. An urgent meeting was called by the ANC with the union leadership. “The ANC said they would deal with these cases and gave permission (for union members) to blow the whistle,” Sema said. 

There were also assurances that politicians under investigation would not be appointed to senior posts until the investigations called for had been completed. These undertakings have largely been ignored and municipal workers in Ekurhuleni, in particular, are incensed. 

In the past two weeks alone, more than 200 workers in that East Rand municipality have been dismissed without the required disciplinary hearings, the union says. Among them are seven shop stewards who were part of a task team set up to assist the Special Investigations Unit to investigate allegations of widespread corruption and mismanagement. 

“Since before the World Cup last year, we have been fighting this,” Samwu Gauteng provincial chair Koena Ramotlou says. 

Following the sale earlier last year of Germiston’s Rand Airport, Samwu lodged an application with the South Gauteng High Court to halt the sale of further council-owned properties and to have all tenders awarded “without due process” declared invalid. 

According to Ramotlou, the council employed delaying tactics, including the late filing of papers, with the result that the matter has still not been heard. 

“We are concerned that properties that provide a sustainable income to the municipality are being sold and that friends of friends may be benefiting,” he said. 

The union, supported by members of the Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union, demanded that these issues be dealt with as a priority. Faced with “foot dragging”, Samwu threatened its strike. But this was “put on hold for 30 days” after assurances from the government. 

This 30-day “breathing space” expired last week and ANC secretary general Gwede Mantashe appeared before the Samwu executive to explain why the pre-election undertakings had not been met. 

“We did not buy into what he said,” notes an executive member, who points out that Ekurhuleni mayor Mondli Gungubele, who is the subject of numerous allegations, continues to head the administration, having recently been “redeployed” to the post. 

“So a strike is back on the agenda,” Tema says. 

Also very much on the agenda are legal challenges. Cosatu general secretary Zwelinzima Vavi has committed the federation to take the matter to the Constitutional Court. 

In this, both Samwu and Cosatu will receive the support of other unions and federations. 

“This secrecy bill is something we don’t need,” National Council of Trade Unions general secretary Manene Samela says. 

The “extreme disquiet” expressed by the Federation of Unions of SA is heightened by the realisation that, should the bill become law, the level of intimidation will be ratcheted up by many degrees. Faced with the prospect of prison terms, potential whistle-blowers will be silenced, the megaphone of the media will be crippled and the public at large will suffer. 

Business Report



End of Document