



The Protected Disclosures Act – no scope for abuse by disgruntled employees
IR - Weekly Comment

The Protected Disclosures Act – no scope for abuse by disgruntled employees

The purpose of the  Protected Disclosures Act 26 of 2000 (PDA), as set out in the preamble, is to “create a culture which will facilitate the disclosure of information by employees relating to criminal and other irregular conduct in the work-place in a responsible manner by providing comprehensive statutory guidelines for the disclosure of such information and protection against any reprisals as a result of such disclosures” and to “promote the eradication of criminal and other irregular conduct in organs of state and private bodies.” The PDA accordingly plays an important role in ensuring that those employers exercising either private or public power are accountable for their actions. However there remains a risk that the PDA may be misused by a disgruntled employee for improper motives. Such was the case in The National Institute for the Humanities and Social Sciences (NIHSS) v Kibiti Lephoto and Minister For Higher Education And Training [2019] JOL 45938 (LAC).

In this matter the respondent employee was appointed as Chief Financial Officer (‘CFO’) of the appellant employer in terms of a 5-year fixed term contract and subject to a twelve-month probationary period. The employer did not confirm the employee’s employment contract at the end of the probationary period and consequently dismissed him for performance related issues. The employee challenged the fairness of his dismissal, claiming that his dismissal was triggered by a protected disclosure as contemplated in the PDA and that the decision to terminate his employment constituted an occupational detriment. An “occupational detriment” is defined in section 1 of the PDA to include inter alia, being subjected to any disciplinary action, being dismissed or being otherwise adversely affected in respect of his or her employment. The employee alleged that his dismissal was automatically unfair as a result.

The court a quo held that the employee had made a protected disclosure regarding what he alleged to be a “questionable relationship” between the CEO of the employer and Mr Mda of Deloitte Consulting, a firm of auditors which had been contracted by the appellant to provide fund management services to it. The employee also alleged that the manner in which the supply chain management had been conducted was in breach of the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (‘PFMA’). The Labour Court held that there was a clear nexus between this disclosure and his dismissal, and concluded that the dismissal was substantively and procedurally unfair. It awarded retrospective reinstatement on this basis. 

Hearing the matter on appeal the Labour Appeal Court noted that the first question that has to be satisfied in order for the employee’s case to be justified was whether there was a protected disclosure as defined in the PDA. The court held that the key factor in this regard was whether the employee had a reason to believe that the so called “questionable relationship” between the CEO and Mr Mda could or tended to show i) that a criminal offence had been committed, or ii) that there had been a failure or a likelihood of failure to comply with any legal obligations or iii) that there was or was a likelihood of a miscarriage of justice. 

Evidence was given that Mr Charles Nupen, an attorney and mediator, was appointed to conduct an independent investigation regarding both the concerns that the CEO had expressed over the employee’s performance and conduct, together with the allegations of impropriety which the employee had levelled against the CEO. His investigation concluded that there was no evidence linking the CEO with impropriety but that instead there was an irreconcilable breakdown in trust between the CEO and the employee. 

The Court concluded that the evidence indicated compellingly that the complaint of the respondent employee was in essence that he was being marginalised by the CEO - which most certainly did not fall under any of the key components of the definition of disclosure. The Court held further that the employee had provided no evidence of an inappropriate personal relationship between the CEO and Mr Mda and found that the allegations in this regard were unjustified.

With regard to the poor performance of the employee the court was of the opinion that it was abundantly apparent from the evidence that the employee’s conduct, prior to his suspension, revealed significant problems with his conduct which had jeopardised the sustainability and legitimacy of the operations of appellant.  It held that:

‘The available evidence suggests that there had been an irretrievable breakdown in the relationship between respondent and CEO, that he had failed to substantiate allegations of impropriety against her, had impugned her character and professional standing and authority as CEO, had made unfounded allegations which, on any reasonable inference, appear to be in retaliation for the difficulties in which he found himself as a result of his own incompetence or lack of performance, and had undermined the decisions of the Board and the CEO in authorising payments to universities, which were central to the functions of appellant, thereby exposing it to potential reputational and organisational risk.’

As the employee’s allegations did not constitute protected disclosures, the employee’s dismissal was not an occupational detriment and instead there was clear evidence that the termination of the employee at the end of the probationary period was well justified. The LAC accordingly upheld the appeal. 

In concluding the LAC significantly noted that:

“The PDA is an important piece of legislation and is part of the overall framework which ensures that the exercise of both public and private power should be conducted in a transparent and accountable way.   It seeks to create a climate in which employees, whether in the private and the public sector, are able to disclose information regarding unlawful and irregular conduct by employers or other employees in the employ of the employer in a manner which will not result in any occupational detriment to a person who commendably considers that the organisation, in which he or she works, should operate legally and in a meticulously regular fashion.   However, the PDA was not enacted to encourage employees, whose own conduct renders them liable to dismissal, to exploit this legislation in a desperate attempt to fend off the inevitable consequences of their own actions or performance.   That the PDA should be interpreted generously in order to vindicate its purpose is one thing, but in a case such as the present, where the facts are overwhelmingly in support of the conclusion that its provisions were abused, the court should have no truck with an attempt to invoke its protection.”  

This case makes it clear that the courts will carefully scrutinise the motive of an employee making an alleged ‘protected’ disclosure before determining whether such employee should benefit from the protections afforded by the PDA. Much depends upon on the circumstances of each case, the nature of the information disclosed and the bona fides of the employee.

Until next time,

Tamara Cohen



End of Document