



Accusations fly at Adcorp as whistleblower seeks recall
IR - News Watch

Accusations fly at Adcorp as whistleblower seeks recall

Reported on: 27 October 2009

Adcorp's house of cards is tumbling noisily, with accusations of fraud, racism, pornography and victimisation flying across the boardroom and threatening the human capital management firm's stability.

Chief executive Richard Pike said yesterday that suspended chief financial officer Faunce Burd was "not familiar" with the claims she herself had made regarding a dispute between the finance and operations divisions of the company. 

Pike said Burd made a statement to the Adcorp board on October 14 claiming no allegations of fraud had been made against anyone at Adcorp. 

This is a twist in a bitter battle in which Burd and several other whistle-blowers had lodged "protected disclosures" about suspected irregularities under the Protected Disclosures Act, which is meant to protect those who highlight problems. 

The whistle-blowers include Burd, Petrus Bierman (manager of the financial shared services division), Jacobus Boonzaaier (senior analyst), Anna Jane Ramsden (head of human resources), Lodewyk Koch (financial general manager at Adcorp Accountability) and Francois van Emmenes (financial manager at Adcorp Accountability).

Specific allegations of fraud, racism and victimisation were made against the group - particularly against chief operations officer Nelis Swart and chief information officer Kobus Pienaar - who had been accused of inappropriate conduct, racism and fraud.

Pike said a personal vendetta between Burd and Swart unravelled at a rapid pace, forcing the board to suspend all whistle-blowers. Burd had in the interim launched a legal battle for her reinstatement and the setting aside of a disciplinary enquiry.

Her attorney, Michael Strauss, said the first fraud allegation related to R7.7 million missing in financial services provider Crestfin's microloan book. Crestfin was responsible for Adcorp's pension and provident fund.

But Pike said that Crestfin's loan book losses were not on Adcorp's accounts, as Crestfin was not a subsidiary. Pike said Adcorp had no ownership in Crestfin. In July Crestfin was pronounced technically insolvent, owing Adcorp R8.6m. 

The court papers allege Pienaar took a performance bonus partly based on a fabricated profit related to Crestfin's debt. Strauss said the allegations of inappropriate conduct included claims of the exchanging of pornography between Pike, Swart and Pienaar.

"We've launched an application in the Labour Court to interdict Adcorp from dismissing our clients pending the outcome of a... hearing," Strauss said.

Adcorp would file answering papers tomorrow. Pike maintained the people in question, including Burd, did not follow the grievance procedure.

"The act protects those who highlight concerns in good faith," he said. "Burd wanted to remain anonymous and said she would make the grievances known to me if I suspended Swart and Pienaar."

The suit alleges that Burd and the others had first-hand knowledge and experience of the intolerable, aggressive and threatening work environment at Adcorp, specifically at the hands of Swart and Pienaar. 

"This, with the unusual nature of their complaints, was the very reason they sought protection under the act, rather than the internal grievance procedure prescribed by the firm." Adcorp's response was still outstanding.

Florence de Vries

Business Report



End of Document