ARBITRATION AWARD

Case Number:	GAEK9256-22
Commissioner:	Johan D. Stapelberg
Date of Award:	22 May 2023

In the ARBITRATION between:

Maake Ngobeni & 4 Others
(applicant)

And

Bidvest Tank Terminal (Pty) Ltd.
(respondent)


DETAILS OF HEARING AND REPRESENTATION
The matter was heard on 20 January 2023 at the NBCCI offices in Marshalltown, Johannesburg; on 15 March 2023 (at the respondent’s offices – to accommodate an inspection in loco); 16 March 2023; 03 May 2023 and 04 May 2023 - at the offices of the NBCCI. Final written submissions on costs were received on 16 May 2023.

The applicants were represented by M. Kutumela (NUMSA Official); the respondent was represented by R. Erasmus (Attorney), assisted by B. Nkala (HR Manager). No interpreter was required, and the matter was heard in English.

A comprehensive outline of the process was given to the parties, including, but not limited to: the applicability of the CCMA’s Misconduct Dismissal Arbitration Guidelines, how evidence is to be presented and how versions are weighed up; the standard of proving a case on a balance of probabilities; the onus on the parties in terms of s.192, as well as the importance of challenging an incompatible version through cross-examination and the consequences of not doing so. I also informed the parties that I may at times adopt a somewhat inquisitorial approach to the process, given that only one party was represented by someone in the legal profession.

The proceedings were recorded digitally, and afterwards uploaded to the NBCCI's database. I also took computer notes, the most salient aspects of which have been summarised into the body of this award.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE
On both the first and second day of arbitration, parties arrived having failed to conduct a pre-arbitration meeting. This in spite of both notices for the proceedings requiring same. On the first day of arbitration, this formed part of the respondent’s reasons for seeking a postponement and indeed parties were cautioned that it would be required to address the proceedings at the conclusion on why it should not be held liable for the wasted costs of the NBCCI for the first day. After that a process ruling was issued and discussed on record – based on consensus between the parties, for a pre-arbitration to be held on 14 February 2023. The respondent’s attorney, Mr Erasmus flew up from Port Elizabeth to attend the meeting, which was not attended by the applicants, only their representative, who claimed that the union failed to inform the applicants – this notwithstanding that the arrangements were discussed on record in the presence of all applicants on


the first day of arbitration, followed by a written ruling to confirm same. That meeting was abandoned after Mr Kutumela indicated that he cannot proceed in the absence of the applicants. The meeting was then rescheduled to continue as an online, virtual Teams meeting on 09 March 2023. Mr Erasmus and the respondent entered the meeting and waited for the applicants for half an hour, before Mr Erasmus left again. Mr Kutumela alleged that he and the applicants were ready at the allotted time but had technical difficulties in connecting to the meeting platform and entering it, and that it was only resolved shortly after Mr Erasmus had left.

The non-compliance with the NBCCI’s notice of arbitration as well as the disregard for the consequent ruling has cost implications and also raises a question of contempt for the proceedings, which parties were told to address at the conclusion of the arbitration. Since the parties twice failed to comply with the NBCCI notices and also failed to comply with the ruling to facilitate same, I (Commissioner) narrowed down the issues in dispute on 15 March 2023, which took up a significant part of the morning, before evidence could be heard.

ISSUE IN DISPUTE
The applicants were dismissed on charges of gross negligence and falsification of company records. Breach of the rules are in dispute as well as well as the appropriateness of the sanction – but only insofar as the breach of the rule is disputed. Applicants do not deny that if there had been a breach of the rule in either charge, dismissal would have been appropriate.

There is no dispute on the procedural fairness of the dismissals.

Parties agreed to legal representation and while given an opportunity to obtain same, the applicants and the union decided to proceed without.

All bundles submitted were from the respondent party. It was agreed – with a few specific exceptions – that the documents are what they purport to be, while not admitting the content thereof. Parties were informed that documents need to be introduced and, where necessary, the content is to be clarified through witness testimony.


BACKGROUND TO THE ISSUE
The applicants were dismissed following a disciplinary process, where they were found guilty of the charges against them. The respondent’s case would be that they all worked closely as a team over a period of time and operated in concert as part of a syndicate to steal paraffin from the respondent’s storage facilities. This resulted in the respondent having to refund its main client, Sasol with over R3 million and having its commercial relationship put at risk. A number of key role players in the process to defraud the respondent resigned, and while the referral also initially included two other applicants, one of these (P.Qwabe) settled her dispute and withdrew from proceedings, while another abandoned the proceedings. The respondent seeks that the dismissals be upheld as fair and that the matter be dismissed with the applicants and the union bearing the respondent’s costs jointly and severally.

The applicants are challenging the substantive fairness of their dismissal, as they deny any wrongdoing either at the time of or prior to the discovery of the missing paraffin, and they seek to be reinstated.

SURVEY OF EVIDENCE AND ARGUMENT
The evidence below captures some of the salient aspects presented by the parties. All evidence and arguments presented were properly considered, even if not specifically referenced.

Respondent’s version
The respondent called five witnesses: Siphiwe Ben Mthembu (Siphiwe / Mr Mthembu), Terminal Manager since June 2022 and with the company for 3 years; Michael Charles Riby-Smith (Mr Riby-Smith
/ Michael), the respondent’s expert witness, with many years’ experience as a Marine Cargo Surveyor, including inventory and inspection services, including the product ranges in question. He has continued working as a consultant since 2017 specifically in loss identification; Bekinkosi Gladstone Nkala (Mr Nkala
/ Beki), HR Director for nearly 8 years; Nkanyiso Nkosi (Mr Nkosi / Nkanyiso), Team Leader since November 2022 and with the company for more than 7 years; and Mrs Naomi Elizabeth De Klerk (Mrs De Klerk / Naomi), Stocks and Stores Manager for the past two years and with the respondent for 13 years.

The respondent’s version through its witnesses is that it became aware of having incurred a substantial loss of paraffin following what it considered a staged break-in at the Isando depot on the evening of 25 July 2022, which was discovered within an hour after it happened. This resulted in an extensive multipart


investigation, and later on also an anonymous whistle-blower’s email and a recorded conversation with outside syndicate buyers. The following submissions were made in giving evidence:

A massive loss of stored paraffin (100 metric tonnes and 75 metric tonnes – roughly 180 000 litres of product in total – respectively from two storage tanks 0875 and 0880) to the value of over R3.2 million had been incurred over a period of time, which the respondent had to repay to its client Sasol – which is its majority client whose products occupy around 70% of its storage tankers at its various depots. The commercial relationship with Sasol has been tarnished as a result of what has happened. Paraffin can be used as an alternative fuel in diesel-powered vehicles and was being stolen and ostensibly sold at great profit by a large-scale syndicate that was operating within the Isando depot with the assistance of many key employees.

It was not possible for this loss to have been incurred only on the evening of 25 July 2022 when the break-in occurred, as there are no pumps in existence with the capacity to transfer that much product within an hour and there were no tanker trucks reported as entering or leaving the premises around this time slot. Tanker trucks have a maximum capacity of around 40 000 litres, which would have required a substantial number of siphoning events from the two tanks in question.

The amount of product spiled on the evening of 25 July 2022 when one of the two tanks was sabotaged to make it appear as if paraffin was being stolen then only, was found to have been around 660 litres, calculating the volume of the space it occupied after the spill. The break-in is considered to have been a red herring to try to misdirect the respondent’s attention and absolve the applicants from wrongdoing in the disappearance of the product. There was no run-off or evaporation of fuel possible, which made the incident very suspicious. Ironically this was the first indication that something was amiss, leading to continuous large-scale investigations and disciplinary and criminal charges against various individuals including the applicants, as the truth of what occurred was being uncovered.

A number of strategic CCTV cameras had been sabotaged and disabled on various dates, including 12 July 2022; 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 July 2022, as well as 22, 23, 24 and 25 July 2022 (11 days) which would most likely account for a substantial portion of the product lost. While only some of the applicants worked on the night of the incident of 25 July 2022, all of the Operators (including all the


applicants) worked over the period in question during which cameras were disabled. All the applicants worked in the weighbridge office. The CCTV monitor in that office shows the weighbridge and the cameras are strategically placed so it is easy for operators to see that incoming trucks are correctly placed on the weighbridge. With cameras switched off, none of the Operators would be able to see the weighbridge, so they would have had to walk out to physically monitor the vehicles. In spite of this, not one of the Operators reported that the CCTV monitors were not working on any of the days in question, further confirming their individual involvement – either by directly helping in the theft or by turning a blind eye and not reporting what was happening right in front of them.

A transcription of an undercover discussion that Mr Nkosi had some time later in the aftermath, with members of a syndicate was relied on. These individuals indicated a desire to revive their operations of stealing paraffin in bulk – and confirmed the involvement of a number of key employees (Jethro and Ms Nzuza were specifically mentioned), but it was confirmed that all of the Operators at the time were involved, as well as the modus operandi of stealing the product over a period of time, with 40 000 litre tankers being used, in the mornings around 06h00 before Managerial staff came on site and with those assisting in the scheme being paid large amounts in cash for their assistance. R320 000.00 in cash was paid to those assisting with stealing 40 000 litres of paraffin, which was transported using Imperial tanker trucks.

Between 12 July 2022 and the eventual commencement of the arbitration, many key employees and service providers who were implicated as working with the syndicate resigned – a number of them doing before, during or at the conclusion of their disciplinary hearings. These including a Security Officer (Mr Zitho), a Stock Clerk (Ms Nzuza), an Electrician (Kenny), and the applicant’s Team Leader (Mr Magazi) at the time. Furthermore, of the 8 operators that the applicants formed part of, 7 had originally been part of the dispute (Jethro abandoned his employment). Of these 7 one abandoned the arbitration proceedings (a ruling was issued) and another (P. Qwabe, who also worked as Weighbridge Clerk) signed a settlement agreement with the respondent, withdrawing her case, hence the arbitration only proceeded in respect of the 5 remaining applicants.

Of the remaining 5 applicants, two (Mr Daniels and Mr Siyo) were directly implicated in the charge of falsification of dipping records (used to record decreases and increases – also called losses and gains – in product volumes contained in the tanks). Mr Mthembu also testified that Mr Daniels was


in the process of being charged as it was determined that he was failing to conduct weekly dips. All of the respondent’s witnesses with direct knowledge of how the dipping process worked confirmed that the records they signed off on over the period in question, were falsified in that identical readings were recorded even with temperature fluctuations over a number of days, which is scientifically impossible as temperature variations will certainly have a direct impact on the volume measurements. It was also testified that the dipping reports are false in claiming that the dips were completed within 5 minutes. It was explained how the dipping process works and that it is not possible to complete a proper dipping process in less than 13 minutes, even with an experienced Operator conducting the dip. Neither of the two applicants who were directly implicated in the falsification testified to address the evidence against them or the probabilities it created.

It was consistently testified that the applicants operated as a team, working in close proximity to each other and the other staff that were implicated and who abandoned their employment. They were a tight knit group who knew each other well, and communicated daily, knowing at all times what was going on on site – they also took their lunch breaks together. The office they shared faced the weighbridge and they would each have observed and be aware of all tankers entering and leaving the premises and would be directly involved in transferring fuel to and from the tankers. They would also work as a team to assist in the loading and offloading of product, working between 4 to 20 tankers per day. Among the key role players assisting the syndicate, no one except the Operators had the skills and knowledge to transfer fuel between the Tanks and the Tanker trucks and no such transfers could take place unless the Operators performed the work. Given the circumstances and the manner of operating it was not possible for anyone in the team to be unaware of what was happening.
No one has offered any explanation for the disappearance of vast volumes of fuel in their care, whereas if they had performed their duties honestly and diligently, there would be a clear audit trail of every tanker they filled, as is required of them, preventing such theft. The syndicate could not have been successful if the applicants had performed their duties as was required of them, it could also not have succeeded without the applicants being complicit in facilitating the theft.

The respondent’s case was that when considering all of the direct, corroborative, and circumstantial evidence presented through its witness and the documentary evidence presented, that apart from those who


had already fled in the face of disciplinary action and immanent criminal prosecution, the applicants were all involved, and that anyone not directly involved was complicit in their silence. While the respondent did not charge the applicants with theft or accomplices to theft, the fact that they remain unable to account for the massive loss of fuel that was directly in their care, together with the evidence of falsification of records resulted in them being also charged with and dismissed in respect of gross negligence in the performance of their duties. The applicants’ responses to being questioned about the losses at the time, and during their hearings were described by Mr Mthembu as appearing to be identical, as if scripted. They pleaded not guilty, denied any wrongdoing, denied they observed anyone committing any offences, yet offered no explanation or even any kind of speculation for how the vast losses may have occurred. The respondent’s witnesses were consistent in submitting that as a consequence of what has happened none of the applicants can be trusted in the performance of their duties and the safe-guarding, properly documented dispensing, and proper accountability for the clients’ products any longer.


Applicant’s version
Maake Barnabas Ngobeni (Mr Ngobeni / Maake) was called to testify on his own behalf and that of the other applicants. No further witnesses were called.

The version presented on behalf of the applicants included the following:
After performing dipping, it was for the Stock Clerk, Nzuza to point out discrepancies and report to the Supervisor to request a re-dip, he cannot take responsibility for his colleagues, Mr Daniels and Mr Siyo and how they conducted and recorded their dips. However, he submitted that in his view there was nothing wrong with the dips and he is certain that all of the operators (including all the applicants) have conducted and recorded dips in exactly the same way – including identical dips and within the 5 minute per tank time-frame, as Mr Daniels and Mr Siyo have done.
He denied his involvement in, or any awareness of stock losses or theft of stock as described and presented by the respondent’s witnesses.
While they do work in teams, each individual has their own responsibilities and were allocated bunds to work at.
There were people working there before they did, who then left and “one never knows what could have happened”. He has not been contacted by the SAPS about any criminal investigation.


He has no knowledge about what the undercover discussion with purported syndicate members discussed, it did not involve him.
He is not involved in IT and had nothing to do with the cameras that were disabled.
Mr Mthembu had just taken over as their Team Leader two months prior to the break-in incident, so they were still building a relationship with him and getting to know him.
He confirmed that he followed all relevant procedures in the performance of his duties and should not have to take the blame for the conduct of others.
When trucks came in, each person worked on their own assisting a truck, not as a team, like the respondent’s witnesses claimed.

During cross-examination, the applicant was reminded that in explaining the proceedings, the Commissioner spent a considerable amount of time explaining the proceedings and in particular that when it comes to thorough cross examination, applicants must test their versions against what witnesses said and that new evidence not put in cross-examination, can be disregarded as fabrications and this would also result in a loss of credibility. It was pointed out that same would be argued in respect of a number of claims made during his evidence, including that each Operator had their own responsibility and were allocated separate bunds; that only one Operator is involved at a time in the loading or decanting of product; and exaggerating the role of security – about whom it was testified that they were in no way involved in the loading and offloading and did not play any role in ensuring or checking the content of the loads, whereas he claimed they were responsible for it. The applicant offered no reasonable explanation for failing to canvas these claims with any of the respondent’s witnesses who testified to the contrary.

When it was put to the applicant that the system was open to manipulation in that the cameras were disabled and there was no oversight of their duties as operators, the witness claimed to be unsure, even though same was alluded to in earlier testimony. When pressed on the issue, he tapped Mr Kutumela’s arm, was confronted about same and apologised. He also conceded that given the seriousness of the offices with which the applicants were charged, it was conceded on their behalf during the narrowing of issues that dismissal would be an appropriate sanction if a person is guilty of the offences in question. It was pointed out that the security guards’ statements during the investigation are in the bundle and were accepted without challenge so the averments made to implicate more of the security officers than the one that was identified


as being deceptive, cannot be entertained and their statements were not challenged in cross-examination of the respondent’s witnesses who canvassed their versions, nor were they called to testify.

The applicant conceded that the respondent’s version was unchallenged that all the applicants and other Operators would have a clear view of the weighbridge from their office and that they would also have seen that the cameras were not working, and had a duty to report that to Management, which they failed to do. He also agreed that the Electrician who resigned before his hearing for disabling the cameras and relocating the clocking machine, would not have had access to the tanks and could not have decanted the 180 000 litres of fuel. The evidence of the involvement of a syndicate in the theft was not challenged, nor the likelihood that all the Operators must have been involved. The applicant denied that they were all part of a corrupted syndicate.

The applicant offered no comment when it was put to him that the version presented by the respondent and which is corroborated in the anonymous whistle-blower’s email and the corrupt buyers from the syndicate, which confirms that all the Operators were involved – that such version is far more probable than the denial being offered as evidence on behalf of the applicants; that they were correctly dismissed, and in spite of repeatedly being offered an opportunity to withdraw from the matter, they have insisted on sitting through an arbitration over a number of days, at great expense to the Bargaining Council and the respondent, without cause and that they and the union should therefore be liable for the expenses incurred as a result.

It was also pointed out that Mr Mthembu and Mr Riby-Smith were not challenged on the probabilities surrounding the fact that the break and vandalising of the Tank in question cannot account for the massive loss suffered. The witness also expressed the view that he does not believe there was a loss of over 180 000 litres of paraffin to the value of over R3.2 million, in spite of same being considered common cause throughout the arbitration with no challenge put to any of the respondent’s witnesses who stated it as fact. The witness took offence to being told he is not so important that the respondent would especially fabricate an entire case about theft of fuel and having to repay a client, just to be able to dismiss him. It was pointed out that this claim further damages his credibility and renders him a dishonest witness. He was offered an opportunity to reconsider his response but maintained his answer.
The witness maintained that he was not guilty of the offences in question and denied that he was part of a syndicate that stole from the respondent.


Closing Statements
Parties submitted oral closing arguments at the conclusion of the process and on 16 May 2023, Mr Erasmus supplemented same in writing regarding the arguments around costs. Closing arguments will not be repeated at length herein for brevity’s sake except to state that Mr Kutumela, on behalf of the applicants maintained they were dismissed unfairly based on mere circumstantial evidence for something they did not do, and sought to be reinstated, whereas the respondent submitted that the dismissals were fair and should be upheld as such.

ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE AND ARGUMENT
Having considered the evidence and arguments presented to me, I find that the applicants’ dismissals were substantively fair. The respondent’s witnesses gave clear, detailed and consistent evidence about the circumstances surrounding the loss and the reasons why the applicants must have been involved on a balance of probabilities. It was submitted that while they were not charged with involvement of theft, they were grossly negligent in the performance of their duties for being unable to account for the company’s loss of product, and that they were engaged in falsification of dipping records – ostensibly to cover up the large scale theft of stored product, which they were unable to account for, nor were they able to offer any alternative version that was more probable.

By contrast, the single witness called on behalf of the applicants, Mr Ngobeni was not reliable and lacked credibility. Significant portions of his version were not put to the respondent’s witnesses in cross-examination and appeared to have been fabricated as he went along – this in spite of the risks of not challenging a version in cross-examination – and the suggestion for individual applicants to keep notes and update their representative, Mr Kutumela on his instructions about the version to be presented. In the end, the version presented by Mr Ngobeni fell to be disregarded to a large extent as it mostly unravelled during cross-examination. Mr Ngobeni was sullen, argumentative and even sought assistance from Mr Kutumela during his cross-examination. He even ended up making the absurd claim that the respondent did not incur any loss – in spite of its loss of R3.2 million being common cause, corroborated in its bundle of documents, and not being challenged throughout the arbitration.

In essence the applicants’ case amounted to a bare denial and a general critique of the respondent’s reliance on circumstantial evidence to support its case of their involvement in colluding with a syndicate to


defraud the respondent and making themselves guilty of falsification of records and of being grossly negligent in the performance of their duties. I consider this approach to have been unwise and misplaced, showing a lack of regard for the existing jurisprudence on questions of circumstantial evidence, hearsay evidence (especially if unchallenged as in this case) and the fact that a bald denial is effectively no version at all. It must be borne in mind that even in criminal proceedings, where the standard of proof is much more onerous, parties have been found guilty beyond reasonable doubt of crimes, based on circumstantial evidence. There is no reason why parties should cling to a delusion of being absolved from responding to circumstantial and even hearsay evidence, by presenting a more probable version – just because either of these is being relied on by their opponent.

In the matter of NUM & another v CCMA (2015) 36 ILJ 2038 (LAC), the Labour Appeal Court found in par [7] as follows:
“[7]  We bear in mind that circumstantial evidence depends for its persuasive power on its cumulative effect and that, at some stage, many indicae may point to the same conclusion that one may properly say is the most probable one to be drawn. It is quite permissible to draw an inculpatory inference from the weakness of a respondent’s evidence. The probabilities need balancing. It is also an important principle to remember that courts in making inferences in civil cases often select a conclusion which seems to be the more natural or plausible one from amongst several conceivable ones. They do that even if that conclusion is not the only one. It shall emerge below that Mr Maphisa failed to provide a reliable or credible explanation in response to the evidence of De Necker as recorded below. It is tis failure on his part that contributes significantly to the ultimate inference that he was involved in the attempted theft”.

The above case is instructive and quite applicable in the matter before me. The respondent presented significant circumstantial evidence that the applicants were directly involved and that even if some may not have been directly involved to have been complicit in turning a blind eye to their colleagues’ conduct, because they worked together and were a tight knit group. The evidence demonstrated the most likely period over which the losses occurred, and that the theft could not have happened without their assistance and facilitation; that it happened right in front of them; that they would have seen that the cameras was not working for almost two weeks, yet no one reported it or offered an explanation for this failure. No one else who was implicated in the offences, including their senior, and other key colleagues stayed to face the consequences. The applicants seem to have clung to this as some kind of evidence that al the culprits have already been identified, while not dealing with any of the probabilities created by the respondent’s version – that they must have all been involved in one way or another, for this long term, ongoing theft from the respondent to continue undetected. Apart from the circumstantial evidence, no version other than denial of the scientific realities


offered, was presented to disprove the direct evidence that two of the applicants had falsified dipping records. To the contrary Mr Ngobeni insisted that all the Operators conducted their dipping in the same way and often recorded identical readings, even with temperature fluctuations, insisting it is not false or out of the ordinary – thereby implicating himself and the remaining applicants and corroborating the respondent’s version. There was no reasonable alternative version to consider from the one presented by the respondent and the applicants’ insistence on trying to rely on the non-sensical once off break in and disappearance of all the fuel was as ill conceived as the red herring it was when it was considered a good idea.

The evidence presented by the respondent confirms that the losses were indeed incurred and explained the likelihood of how the losses happened, implicating all of the applicants therein, without offering direct evidence of individual involvement – apart from the falsified dip records. The method of how the losses occurred undetected due to standardising dip measurements falsely is something they were all involved in. Their silence, on their own behalf and on behalf of each other does not exonerate them or present a more likely alternative version. Given the extent to which the respondent’s processes are prescriptive in terms of thorough record keeping and having proper audit trails, and considering the major role the applicants played in this and the amount of trust and independence they enjoyed without anyone second guessing them due to their specialised skills - it only makes sense that the applicants should be able to account for the losses and their failure to do so amounts to gross negligence and resulted in the destruction of the trust relationship.
Considering the above, I find that the applicants’ dismissals were substantively fair.


Costs
Respondent’s Submissions
Mr Erasmus submitted that the applicant ignored the NBCCI’s repeated direction in its notice of set down, as well as the Commissioner’s ruling, following an agreement between the parties, to hold a pre-arbitration – doing so twice subsequent to the ruling. This caused the expense of travel from Durban, the Cost of flights as well as wasted costs on an attorney and client scale – which is to be levelled at NUMSA in that Mr Kutumela failed to comply. The rules of the NBCCI indicates that an order of costs may be made in respect of the non-compliance with the directive in the notice of set down.


The second area of costs should be awarded against the applicants and NUMSA, jointly and severally one paying the other to be absolved. The Bargaining Council had to endure the mischief of the applicant’s case and the dishonesty with which it was being presented. Multiple claims were made in questioning the respondent’s witnesses, yet none of it was dealt with in the applicant’s evidence lead by Mr Ngobeni. On the other hand, Mr Ngobeni testified to various aspects which were in conflict with the version of the respondent’s witnesses, yet none of it was put to them in cross-examination. The applicant’s conduct was reprehensible in the context of them losing R3.2 million of product which the respondent had to pay for. It was reprehensible in that they were twice offered to settle the dispute with a withdrawal and to walk away without the possibility of prosecution, even up to the second last day of arbitration, but the respondent was shouted down by the union in raising the prospect during the applicant’s testimony. The respondent has sat through 4 days of arbitration at huge expense. It must have been evident from the outset that at least two of the five applicants had behaved fraudulently with the falsification of records. The applicants and NUMSA’s pursuit of the case was unreasonable. It was asked on record if instructions had been taken from the members and Mr Kutumela replied in the affirmative and said they are ready to proceed.

Costs should not generally be awarded if there was a genuine dispute, but that is not the case. The applicant colluded and participated with a syndicate – there is no genuine dispute, but a constructed case with no merit. Costs should be awarded from a perspective of fairness. The employer cannot continue to be brow beaten to have to attend an arbitration under these circumstances, as it is a shocking display.

Applicant’s Submissions
Mr Kutumela referred to the matter of Member of the Executive Council for Finance, KwaZulu-Natal and Another v Dorkin No and Another (DA16/05) [2007] ZALAC 41; (2008) 29 ILJ 1707 (LAC) (21 December 2007) where in par.19 it was found that on the issue of costs (awarded in matters before the Labour Appeal Court), cost orders are not to be made unless the requirements of law and fairness are met; that costs should strike a fair balance between not unduly discouraging parties from approaching the labour court and labour appeal court to have dispute dealt with and allowing those parties to bring frivolous cases, and that the court should err on the side of not discouraging parties to approach the court with their disputes.


He explained that it was not the union’s intention to fail to honour the instructions and ruing from the NBCCI, or else he would not have driven to the company’s premises, though it is unfortunate that the applicants failed to attend due to a misunderstanding.

The meeting was rescheduled to take place virtually, and arrangements were made, and the applicants were with him, but they had a challenge with their internet connection and by the time they managed to connect to the meeting, Mr Erasmus had already left the meeting.

Ruling on Costs
Having considered the conduct of the applicant and their representative and the lack of merits in the case, I see no reason why the applicants and the union should not, in terms of s.138(10) of the LRA, read with Rule 39 of the NBCCI, be held jointly and severally liable for the costs of the respondent. Such costs would include travel and subsistence costs for its witnesses and legal costs on an attorney client scale in respect of the costs incurred as a result of the applicants’ failure to attend the in-person pre-arbitration meeting of 14 February 2023, and of the subsequent virtual pre-arbitration meeting of 09 March 2023. Due to this repeated failure to comply with the directives of the Council and the ruling of the Commissioner, a substantial part of the second day of arbitration was spent with the Commissioner assisting parties with the narrowing down of issues.

It is also noteworthy that settlement offers were made on record and repeatedly declined in pursuit of a case that ended up demonstrating no merit at all, which aggravates the conduct of the applicant and its representative in these proceedings. Mr Erasmus warned from the first day that the respondent would be seeking wasted costs for a frivolous case, and the multiple adjournments may have been better used if the union also appointed a legal representative – as the right to legal representation was extended to both parties – yet it was declined, and the matter proceeded with the same representation and the same ill-conceived strategy. This was the path chosen by the applicant party.

While I am mindful of the need to not prevent earnest parties from ventilating disputes and robustly engaging, I also agree that parties should not have to defend frivolous and meritless cases, nor should dispute resolution forums have to entertain same, without consequence to those who pursue matters without merit. As such I find that the applicants and the union should indeed be held liable for the costs of the respondent, as referenced above.



The respondent has as part of its supplementation submitted a bill of costs at my request, however in terms of Rule 39 of the Dispute Resolution Procedures of the NBCCI, as per the October 2007 amendments, a party must submit a bill of costs to the Taxation Master appointed by the Bargaining Council, and in terms of sub paragraph 5, there is also a taxing form to be completed and other criteria to be completed when applying for same.



AWARD
I find the dismissal of the applicants to have been substantively fair.


The applicants and union are ordered to pay the costs of the respondent on an attorney client scale, including travel and subsistence costs for its witnesses and legal costs on an attorney client scale in respect of the costs incurred as a result of the applicants’ failure to attend the in-person pre-arbitration meeting of 14 February 2023, and of the subsequent virtual pre-arbitration meeting of 09 March 2023, as well as the four days over which the matter was arbitrated.

The respondent may submit its bill of costs to the Council’s Taxation Master in the prescribed format as set out in Rule 39 of the Dispute Resolution Procedures of the NBCCI within 7 days of this award.






Johan D. Stapelberg COMMISSIONER