







IN THE BARGAINING COUNCIL FOR THE CIVIL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY (“BCCEI”) HELD AT JOHANNESBURG

In the arbitration between





A R B I T R A T I O N A W A R D


CASE NUMBER:	CCEI 521-19
LAST DATE OF HEARING:	16 SEPTEMBER 2020 CLOSING ARGUMENTS RECEIVED:	28 SEPTEMBER 2020
DATE AWARD SUBMITTED:	8 OCTOBER 2020
NAME OF COMMISSIONER:	COEN HAVENGA







Centre for Dispute Resolution
Block F, Eastgate Office Park, South Boulevard, Bruma, 2198 P O Box 2699, Bedfordview, Johannesburg, 2008
Tel No. (011) 450 4966/3
Fax No. 086 550 4995
Email: disputes@bccei.co.za

Details of hearing and representation


This matter was referred for arbitration to the Bargaining Council for the Civil Engineering Industry (“the BCCEI”) in terms of section 191 of the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 as amended (“the LRA”) and was heard at the Council offices in Bruma on 27 July 2020 and 16 September 2020 respectively.

The Applicant is NUM on behalf of Mr Mdletshe, K, represented by Mr Lesabe, M, a union official. The Respondent is Eskom Rotek Industries SOC (Pty) Ltd., represented by Mr Sibanyone, S, the HR manager.

Ms Ndlovu, J acted as interpreter. The proceedings were recorded.


Issue to be decided


The dismissal of the Applicant is not in dispute. I have to determine whether his dismissal was substantively fair. The Applicant does not dispute the procedural fairness of his dismissal.

Background to the dispute


The parties conducted a pre-arbitration meeting, the minutes of which are reflected in B31, and forms part of the record.

The Applicant was employed as a driver since 1 March 2015. His basic salary was R17 045,00 at the time of his dismissal.

Although the Applicant was charged with several charges, he was found guilty of only one charge, i.e. stealing pieces of steel from ERI. The Applicant was dismissed on 19 August 2019.

The Respondent argues that the Applicant was found guilty of a dismissible offence which led to an irretrievable breakdown in the trust relationship. The Applicant was part of a group of employees who loaded scrap steel belonging to the Respondent on to an Eskom truck and unlawfully sold it to a scrap dealer.

The Applicant disputes the allegations he was charged with. The Applicant had no intention to steal from the Respondent.  He did not commit theft and there can

therefore not be a breakdown in trust relationship. He merely assisted some of his colleagues to load the scrap metal on to the truck.

The relief the Applicant seeks from this arbitration hearing is retrospective reinstatement.

Summary of evidence


What follows is only a summary of evidence deduced at the arbitration hearing and does not purport to be a verbatim transcription of all the testimony given. The digital recording of the proceedings will reflect the complete testimony of the witnesses. The fact that I have not captured all of it should not be misconstrued that I have not taken it into account, and my findings are accordingly within the context of all evidence and submissions

Respondent’s case


The Respondent submitted the documents contained in bundle “A”.

Lucky Biyela (“Biyela”), testified under oath that he is employed by the Respondent as an investigator. A33 – 53 reflects the report of the incident. On 2 November 2018 they received a tipoff from a whistle blower that a truck belonging to Eskom Rotek Industries (“ERI”) was spotted parked at a scrap dealer in Primrose.

When they arrived at the scrap dealer, they found the truck with two occupants inside,
i.e. Muswanganyi and Hlungwane. A gold coloured Jetta was parked behind the truck. The Applicant was inside the Jetta. They went into the scrap dealer and found a person wearing with a blue Eskom T-shirt, as reflected in A50. They asked him where he worked, and he said he was working at the scrap dealer. They continued to question him, and he then admitted that he worked for ERI. He told them they used the ERI truck to transport the steel to the scrap dealer to sell it.

They linked the Applicant to the incident because he was part of the group of people who loaded the steel onto the truck in the premises of the Respondent, and they found him on the scene at the scrap dealer where the steel was sold. Four people were involved in the crime. They found all four on the scene at the scrap dealer, including the one with the blue ERI shirt.

The investigators used a Golf 7 which was known to all the employees. When the Applicant became aware that the investigators were watching them, he drove away. They concluded that all four took the steel without permission and used the truck without permission. They found money and a receipt on the table inside the scrap dealer, to the value of R5400,00, as reflected in A51. That was the money that was going to be the payment to the four employees for the scrap steel belonging to ERI. A52 shows the receipt has been stamped “paid”. Zolile Mndela was the main investigator.

The gold coloured Jetta found at the scene belonged to the Applicant. It was parked behind the truck when they arrived there. The Applicant drove away as soon as he noticed the investigators on the scene. The video footage showed that it was the same truck, which was loaded in the yard, i.e. FP50DNGP. The Applicant’s explanation was that he went to the hardware shop, then went to Mica in Primrose, and on the way saw the truck parked at the scrap dealer. It was cleat that the Applicant was part of the group that stole the steel from ERI.

Under cross-examination Biyela said that the Applicant was linked to the incident because he helped to load the steel on to the truck and was found at the scene where the steel was sold unlawfully. They needed permission to remove the steel. A33 was compiled by Mndela. They found Zungu inside the scrap dealer. The investigators were asked to have a physical presence at the MAN TRUCK STORE where the steel was loaded due to an increase of the theft of copper. The Applicant drove away from the scene at the scrap dealer when the investigators arrived there.

Sipho Manqele (“Manqele”) testified under oath that he is a security supervisor at the Respondent. He was part of the investigation team. On 2 November 2018 they went to a scrap dealer in Primrose after receiving a tip-off. He found Biyela at the scene. He saw a gold coloured Jetta with the Applicant inside parked behind the Eskom truck. The Applicant then drove away from the scene. They approached another Eskom employee, Zungu, outside the premises. They asked him where he was working, and he said he was working for the Primrose scrap dealer. They went inside with him where he requested them to go out again. Outside he admitted that he worked for ERI, and not the scrap dealer. He told them they sold the steel they took form ERI and was waiting for the money. A51 reflects the R5400,00 that was paid to them. He apologised and said they must have a talk as African people to resolve the matter. He said he would tell them everything. He said he will call everyone that were involved so that they could have those talks. He called the Applicant, Muswanganyi and Hlungwane. Manqele the had to go back to the office and he left the scene.

Under cross-examination Manqele testified that he was not involved in the matter after he returned to the office. Zungu was found outside the premises. The fact that the Applicant fled the scene made him believe that the Applicant was involved in illegal activities. If he were only curious about the truck being at the scrap dealer, he could have waited and asked Manqele about it, as he knew him, and not flee the scene.

Zolili Innocent Mndela (“Mndela”) testified under oath that he is an investigator and he compiled the report reflected in A36. They received a tip-off on 2 November 2018 that a ERI truck was spotted going into a Primrose Recycling, a scrap dealer. He, Lucky and Sipho went there in two vehicles. When they arrived there, they found the truck parked outside the scrap dealer, with two occupants inside. They also spotted a gold coloured Jetta parked behind the truck. They started to take photos of the scene and the Applicant sped off in the Jetta.

They found Zungu, A50, inside the scrap dealer. They found him between the cars in the parking area. When they confronted him, he said he was working for the scrap dealer. He was however wearing an Eskom T-shirt. They asked about the shirt and he then admitted that he was employed by Eskom. He told them that they went there to sell steel. He said he came with the persons in the truck. He started to negotiate with them. He called the others and Muswanganyi, Hlungwane and the Applicant came to the scene. Zungu told them on the phone that they should come as it looked that they might negotiate with the investigators. They came and wanted to negotiate the matter.

An employee of the scrap dealer had the cash and receipt ready for Zungu as payment for the steel. The investigators took the money and receipt, counted it, and took photos of it, as reflected in A48, A51 and A52. Zungu cooperated with them and told them he was waiting for the money to be paid to them for the steel they sold. The Applicant told them he only assisted the others to load the steel because it was the practice to help each other. He then joined them at the scrap dealer later. He fled the scene when he saw Manqele, whom he knew. That was very suspicious behaviour. The Applicant returned to the scene when Zungu called him. It was clear that they had a common purpose to steal the scrap steel form ERI. The scrap steel belonged to ERI.

The Applicant only worked half-day on that Friday, and he could have gone to the hardware store after work. He went during the morning as an excuse to follow the truck to the scrap dealer. MAN TRUCK premises was flagged as a hot spot for theft of

copper and other consumables. They upgraded security and even caught security officers that were in cahoots with employees. Mndela has no doubt that the Applicant was involved in the theft and selling of the steel that belonged to ERI. Theft is a dismissible offence in terms of the Respondent’s disciplinary code. Others that were found guilty of the same transgressions were also dismissed.

Under cross-examination Mndela testified that the Applicant did not have to help the others to load the truck, as they did not work together. He should have been suspicious of what they were doing. The witness does not dispute that there is a Mica store in Primrose, and that the Applicant would pass the scrap dealer going there. He arranged it like that to cover his movements. He could have done his private business after work on that Friday, he had ample time as they only worked half-day. The circumstantial evidence shows his intention was to meet them at the scrap dealer. It is strange that he ran away from the suspected trouble if he was innocent. It is also strange that he then came back to suspected trouble when Zungu called him. All the other persons involved, i.e. Muswanganyi, Hlungwane and Zungu were also dismissed.

Don Moloi (“Moloi”) testified under oath that he is the acting portfolio manager for operational support. He received the investigation report and followed the disciplinary code. He had to ask for dismissal as a result of the prevalence of theft in the stores. That sanction is prescribed by the disciplinary code. The trust relationship between the Respondent and the Applicant has broken down irretrievably due to his actions. The theft impacts negatively on their deliverables as a support facility, and they pay penalties for not meeting deadlines on projects as a result of stolen materials. It impacts on the integrity of the company.

The Applicant did not cross-examine Moloi.

Applicant’ scase


The Applicant submitted the documents contained in Bundles “B”.

Khumbula Mdletshe (‘the Applicant”) testified under oath that he asked his supervisor, Sipho Mvelase, for permission to go to the hardware shop on 2 November 2018. He was granted permission. Mvelase asked him to go and buy him food, which the Applicant did. He went to the hardware store but did not find what he was looking for. On his return to the warehouse he found the truck that was being loaded. The persons that were loading, i.e. Muswanganyi, Hlungwane and Zungu, told him it is items that

was given to them by another truck’s crew. He helped them to load as they usually did. It was a practice to help each other. He did ask them where they were taking the items, and they said somewhere in Primrose. It never crossed his mind that it could be unlawful.

After the truck left, he decided to go to Mica in Primrose because it was close to where he was staying. When he turned in a street going to Mica, he noticed the ERI truck at the scrap dealer. He stopped because he wanted to ask them whether they were taking the steel which they loaded to the scrap dealer. After he stopped, he received a call from his brother. While he was busy on the phone, he saw a car pulling up, and the occupant was taking photos. He recognised Manqele and he then became scared. He then thought they were busy with illegal actions. He was not involved in taking it out of the yard. He then drove off. He was not speeding or running away. Manqele took photos of him when he drove away.

He went to Mica and got a quote for cement. He drove back the same way and found the investigators were still on the scene. They were talking and left after he arrived. He then went back to work. He wanted to report to his supervisor what happened, but he had already gone home. The Applicant then also went home. B52 is his statement he made to the investigators afterwards. He had no intention to steal when he assisted in loading the steel on to the truck.

Under cross-examination the Applicant testified that he only asked once for permission to go to the hardware store. He went to Malvern twice. He does not remember Zungu calling him to come back. He went back because he wanted to ask the others whether they had permission to take the steel. He did not run away; he became scared when he saw they were taking photos. The way in which he drove off, might have given them the impression that he was speeding off, but that is just the way he drives. He stopped at the truck because he was curious. He was scared because they might have thought he was involved.

The investigators showed them that the truck from which the steel supposedly came, came into the yard empty, so the steel could not have come from that truck like the others told him. He now knows that they were stealing the steal from ERI, but he was not involved. He does not dispute that he assisted with the loading of the steel, and that he was found on the scene at the scrap dealer where it was sold unlawfully.

Analysis of evidence and argument


Both parties submitted comprehensive closing arguments which form part of the record and will not be repeated here. I have considered all the arguments, case law and legal principles referred to by the parties, together with the other evidence, oral and documentary, presented by the parties during the arbitration hearing, as reflected in the record of the arbitration hearing.

In considering the fairness of the dismissal of the Applicant for misconduct, I will consider the principles contained in the Code of Good Practice: Dismissals, as contained in Schedule 8 to the Labour Relations Act 66 of 1995 (the Code). The dismissal of the Applicant is not in dispute. The Applicant disputes the substantive fairness of his dismissal, and the Respondent is therefore required to prove on a balance of probabilities that it was substantively fair. An arbitration hearing constitutes a full rehearing on the merits as well as an investigation of the fairness of the procedure followed by the employer, should the latter be in dispute. The decision of the arbitrator is not reached with reference to the evidential material that was before the employer at the time of its enquiry, but on the evidential material placed before the arbitrator during the arbitration hearing. This means that all relevant evidence must be placed before the arbitrator in proper form, even if it has been fully canvassed at the employee’s disciplinary hearing. (See Sidumo & another v Rustenburg Platinum Mines Ltd & others [2007] JOL 20811 (CC, where the Court approved the LAC dictum in Count Fair Foods (Pty) Ltd v CCMA & Others [1999] 11 BLLR 1117 (LAC)).

Substantive fairness


The Applicant was charged with and found guilty of theft of steel belonging to ERI. The Applicant disputes the allegations of which he was found guilty of. The Respondent argues that the Applicant was found guilty of a dismissible offence which led to an irretrievable breakdown in the trust relationship.

It is not in dispute that the Applicant assisted Muswanganyi, Hlungwane and Zungu to load pieces of steel belonging to ERI on to a ERI truck, that those pieces of steel were removed from the premises of the Respondent without permission, and then illegally sold to Primrose Recycling as scrap metal for an amount of R5400,00. It is not in dispute that those actions constituted theft, which is a dismissible offence in terms of the disciplinary code of the Respondent. It is not in dispute that the Applicant was found at the scene where the steel was sold illegally, and that he drove off in a manner that might have appeared as if he was fleeing the scene as soon as he noticed the

investigator whom he knew. The Applicant denies any involvement in the theft of the steel, and the Respondent relies on the circumstantial evidence to prove that the Applicant was involved in the theft and that he had the intention to steel those pieces of steel with the intent to sell it for personal gain.

The Respondent therefore requires me to draw an inference from the available evidence that the Applicant assisted to load the pieces of steel on to the truck with the intention to steal it, and that he, together with the others three employees, illegally sold the steel to Primrose Recycling as scrap metal for the amount of R5400,00.

Circumstantial evidence constitutes indirect proof. As arbitrator, I have to adopt an approach to circumstantial evidence similar to the approach in civil courts, as the same standard of proof applies. This approach was formulated by the Appellate Division in AA Onderlinge Assuransie Assosiasie Bpk v De Beer (1982) 2 SA 603 (A) where the court stated that something will be proved by circumstantial evidence when –
The inference to be drawn is consistent with all the facts proven, and
The inference to be drawn is the most plausible inference.

One must differentiate between an inference and an assumption, conjecture or speculation, as stated by the court in S v Naik (1969) 2 SA 231 (N) and in Caswell v Powell Duffryn Associated Colleries Ltd 1940 AC.

In the light of the above legal principles as stated in case law, I am of the opinion that I can draw the inference on the available evidence that the Applicant assisted to load the pieces of steel on to the truck with the intention to steal it, and that he, together with the others three employees, illegally sold the steel to Primrose Recycling as scrap metal for the amount of R5400,00. It would not be an assumption or mere speculation, considering the proven facts, but the only reasonable inference to be drawn.

The Applicant’s version is alive with improbabilities. It is improbable that he would have helped employees load the steel merely because he wanted to help, without knowing why they were loading it, considering that they worked in different departments. The Applicant was then found at the scene of the illegal activities where the stolen steel was sold. His version that he drove passed by coincidence is highly improbable. This is amplified by the fact that he sped off as soon as he recognized the investigators. If he indeed were innocent, it is probable that he would not have done so. The Applicant admitted that it might have appeared that he was speeding off due to the way he drives. This version merely corroborates the evidence of the Respondent’s witnesses that he fled the scene. The Applicant testified that he drove

away because he was afraid that they might have thought he was involved. The question is involved with what? The only probable explanation to that question is that he knew there were illegal activities taking place.

The Applicant then returned to the scene of the crime. I find his version that he merely returned to find out what was happening, again highly improbable. He would not have returned for that reason only, considering the fact that he testified that he left the scene because he was scared. It is improbable that a person would return willingly to the scene which made him fled it in fear shortly before in the first place. It is more probable that he returned to the scene because Zungu called him with the message that they might negotiate their way out of their illegal actions, knowing that the investigators already placed him at the scene. Zungu told the investigators that he would call all those involved to come and negotiate. The fact that he called the Applicant merely confirms that the Applicant was part of their scheme to steal and sell the steel from the outset. The Applicant did not deny that he was called by Zungu, he merely testified that he could not recall Zungu calling him.

If the Applicant helped to load the truck, and was then not involved any further at all, his version that he did not know it was stolen goods, might have been probable and reasonable. However, his subsequent actions favours the probability and the only reasonable inference to be drawn, i.e. that the Applicant assisted to load the pieces of steel on to the truck with the intention to steal it, and that he, together with the others three employees, illegally sold the steel to Primrose Recycling as scrap metal for the amount of R5400,00.

I find that the Respondent proved on a balance of probabilities that the Applicant committed the misconduct that he was found guilty of. I am satisfied that the Respondent proved on a balance of probabilities that the Applicant contravened a rule or standard regulating conduct in, or of relevance to, the workplace.

There is no evidence before me that the rules were invalid or unreasonable, that the Applicant was not aware of the rules or that the rules were inconsistently applied by the Respondent. The undisputed evidence of the Respondent shows that all the employees involved in the theft of the steel were dismissed.

The Respondent argues that the Applicant was found guilty of a dismissible offence which led to an irretrievable breakdown in the trust relationship.

In considering an appropriate sanction, I am required to exercise my discretion reasonably, honestly and with due regard to the general principles of fairness. The Code states that one of the requirements of a fair dismissal for misconduct is that the dismissal must be an “appropriate” remedy, in the light of the facts of the case. The courts have accepted that the ultimate justification for employers’ power to impose discipline flows from their right to manage their business effectively. (See De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd v CCMA & Others [2000] 21 ILJ 1051 (LAC) at 1058F-G).

It is well established that the relationship between employer and employee is in essence one of trust and confidence and that, at common law, conduct clearly inconsistent therewith entitles the “innocent” party to cancel the agreement. (See Angehrn and Piel v Federal Cold Storage Co Ltd 1908 TS 761 at 777–778.).

The Applicant was found guilty of theft, which constitutes dishonest conduct. The Labour Appeal Court had this to say about the effect of dishonesty by an employee on the employment relationship in Anglo American Farms t/a Boschendal Restaurant v Komjwayo (1992) 13 ILJ 573 (LAC): “This trust which the employer places in the employee is basic to and forms the substratum of the relationship between them. A breach of this duty goes to the root of the contract of employment and of the relationship between employer and employee.” Dismissal is generally justified in all cases of serious dishonesty, not merely those in which employees enrich themselves materially at the expense of their employer, as was done in this case – John Grogan, Workplace Law, 10th Edition. Dismissal is an appropriate sanction when the offence involves dishonesty, even in the case of a first-time offender. See Pillay v C G Smith Sugar Ltd (1985) 6 ILJ 530 (IC) at 538 G.

An employer generally would have two reasons for wanting to get rid of a dishonest employee – one is that the employee can no longer be trusted, and the other is the need to send a signal to other employees that dishonesty will not be tolerated. The latter relates to the deterrence theory of punishment. A successful business operates on the basis of trust. Dishonesty, including theft, to such an extent impacts on the trust relationship that dismissal normally is, or should be, a sensible operational response to risk management in the particular enterprise. The Labour Court has indicated that to be the legal position, and that it is impractical to draw subtle distinctions between degrees of theft – see Miyambo v CCMA & others (2010) 31 ILJ 2031 (LAC). Mitigating factors such as a clean record and long service are unlikely to restore the trust relationship especially if the employee shows no remorse and consistently deny wrongdoing as in casu.

I had due regard to the principles set out in the case of Edcon Ltd v Pillemer NO & others [2010] 1 BLLR 1 (SCA) which underlines the principle that the employer has the burden of proof to show that the trust relationship has broken down irretrievably. The labour courts have held that the destruction of the relationship of trust is the ultimate justification for a dismissal. (See Council for Scientific & Industrial Research v Fijen [1996] 6 BLLR 685 (AD); Lahee Park Club v Garrat [1997] 9 BLLR 1137 (LAC)).

The actions of the Applicant leave no option for the application of progressive discipline. I could find no other circumstances from the evidence that would dictate differently.

The Applicant’s years of service cannot outweigh the gravity and seriousness of his offence. The Labour Appeal Court has held that long service cannot in itself provide a basis for rendering a dismissal unfair. See De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd v CCMA & Others (2000) 21 ILJ 1051 (LAC).

I find that dismissal is an appropriate sanction in the circumstances.

I accordingly find the Applicant’s dismissal substantively fair.

Procedural fairness


The Applicant does not dispute the procedural fairness of his dismissal, and I accordingly find the Applicant’s dismissal procedurally fair.

Relief

The Applicant is not entitled to relief.


Award


The application is dismissed.


SIGNED AT KEMPTON PARK ON THIS 8TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2020




Coen Havenga Council Commissioner