



'Massive’ claim over bread fixing
IR - News Watch

'Massive’ claim over bread fixing

Reported on: 23 November 2010 

A group of civil society organisations and consumers are seeking to launch what they say will be a “massive” civil claim against three companies found to have colluded in bread price fixing. 

Their legal team was in the Cape High Court on Tuesday to argue an urgent application for the court to formally certify the claim as a class action. 

Argument will continue on Thursday morning. 

The organisations -- the Children's Resources Centre Trust, the Black Sash, Cosatu Western Cape and the National Consumer Forum -- said in a statement on Tuesday that they were seeking “unprecedented damages” against Pioneer Foods, Tiger Consumer Brands and Premier Foods. 

Their attorney Charles Abrahams said it was only the second class action ever undertaken in South Africa, and the first of its kind to seek actual damages for the victims. 

He said the amount of the damages would be quantified as the main case --for which summonses have yet to be served -- got under way. 

Abrahams said although the three companies were given large administrative penalties by the Competition Commission, consumers had not been compensated. 

“Our class action is initially aimed at representing the millions of bread consumers in the Western Cape, but we intend to extend it nationally as well,” he said. 

It was envisaged to set up a trust to administer the amount claimed from the companies, for the benefit of consumers. 

He said they were also asking the court to declare that a second application, by a group of Western Cape bread distributors, among them whistleblower Imraan Mukaddam, was a class action. 

In court, advocate Renata Williams, for the applicants, said the certification application was being brought as an urgent matter because the period in which civil claims related to the price fixing could be brought against Tiger, would expire on Saturday. 

This meant a summons had to be served by Friday. 

She said the fact that the Competition Tribunal found Pioneer and Tiger guilty of unlawful price fixing meant that “all” South Africans paid more for bread than they had to . 

In essence, the claim revolved around socio-economic rights, and particularly the constitutional right to sufficient food. 

There were people who spent almost a quarter of their monthly salary on bread, she said. 

Acting Judge Francois van Zyl said he “might have a problem” if the definition of class remained as wide as it was in the “consumer” claim, because he would then be included. 

Williams conceded he might indeed be a member of the class, but added that someone needed to hear the case. 

She could not see that there was anything untoward in his hearing the case. The advocates for the three food groups agreed. 

Paul McNally, for Pioneer, said a summons issued before certification was not procedurally null and void. 

This meant the application was not urgent, and should be struck off the roll. 

He also said a higher bread price did not necessarily mean that the right to sufficient food had been infringed. 

The applicants had made no attempt to quantify what was sufficient food, or what the price rise was, that meant they would not have enough. 

The “class” envisaged by the applicants, or consumers in general, was “manifestly one which is excessively broad”. 

McNally said that unlike individual consumers, the distributors apparently each had a potentially massive claim, and there was therefore no reason for them to engage in a class action. 

“They are not members of a class for whom class action is appropriate. They don't fall within the definition,” he said. 

Their claims should rather be dealt with individually. 

In February this year the Competition Tribunal imposed a R196 million fine on Pioneer for its participation in the price-fixing cartel. 

In 2007, the tribunal imposed a administrative penalty of R98.8 million on Tiger Consumer Brands. 

During 2007, Premier Foods sought leniency from the Competition Commission for its role in the cartel.

Sapa 

Business Report



End of Document