



Govt out to tackle corruption
IR - News Watch

Govt out to tackle corruption

Reported on: 12 November 1998

Senior public servants may soon have to follow the example of MPs by declaring their personal financial interests in a public register aimed at guarding against corruption. 

This was one of the recommendations from the anti-corruption conference held at parliament over the past two days. Other recommendations included setting up anti-corruption courts and toll-free, whistle-blowing lines to report tax dodgers and corrupt policemen. 

Justice Minister Dullah Omar vowed that the conference was not just a talk-shop and that recommendations aimed at removing the scourge of corruption from South African society would be implemented as soon as possible. 

The idea of an asset register for senior public servants would be for officials from at least the level of deputy director and above. 

A toll-free hotline for whistle-blowers will be set up by the South African Revenue Services to enable members of the public to report tax dodgers. 

SARS acting chief Pravin Gordhan told the conference that the line would be set up late this month so that the public could report anybody involved in tax fraud. 

It would run for a trial period of two weeks. From today it would only be available to staff members to get the system running. 

The government was probably losing an estimated R20 billion a year in terms of the tax gap - "what we should be collecting and what we are collecting", he explained. 

Between October 1997 and September 1998, the SARS had embarked on a "tax base broadening exercise" where SARS staff went out into the streets and visited people at their homes and businesses to find that on PAYE, where employers were collecting tax from employees, 81 000 were investigated and 18 000 employers, or 22%, were not registered. 

National assembly public service committee chairman Salie Manie said the proposal for an asset register was aimed at informing the public when MPs had potential conflicts of interest between their public duty and their private interest. 

Another short-term measure to combat corruption was the compilation of a blacklist of individuals and organisations found to be involved in corruption, Mr Manie said. 

Better protection was needed for people who blew the whistle on corruption in the public service, delegates to the anti-corruption conference agreed. 

Mr Omar said afterwards that the Bill was important in the fight against corruption. 

The manager of Idasa's political information and monitoring service, Mr Richard Calland, earlier urged a conference commission to say "clearly and categorically" that the Bill should be passed. 

In another commission, delegates agreed it was crucial to strengthen the public service code of conduct and implement it across all sectors of government and parastatals if the fight against corruption was to succeed. 

It recommended that the "Batho-Pele" campaign ­ a government initiative to improve public service delivery ­ should be expanded into a public programme. 

This would encourage society to participate in whistle-blowing. 

The Mercury 

Andre Koopman & Sapa 



End of Document