



Business unaware of law on reporting corruption
IR - News Watch

Business unaware of law on reporting corruption

Reported on: 28 March 2007

Cape Town - Nearly eight out of 10 private sector firms were unaware of the legal requirement to report corruption to the police, Geraldine Fraser Moloketi, the minister for public service and administration, told MPs in the national assembly yesterday.

She said a report on corruption in the private sector, commissioned by the National Anticorruption Forum, highlighted the significant incidence of bribery and corruption in the sector and the low awareness of the statutory requirement to report.

Reporting to the house on the first Africa forum on fighting corruption, held in Gauteng earlier this month, Fraser Moloketi said a new - and broader - definition of corruption came out of the forum.

"It marks a significant departure from the traditional, narrow and restricted definition, which focuses the gaze of attention on the recipient of the bribe in cases where there is abuse and misuse of public power and public resources for private benefit," she said. "We have now agreed that ... all organs of civil society are susceptible to acts of corruption."

She pointed out that the new, broader definition required more comprehensive measures to counter corruption. "It is not just the developing countries that need to take action: international and cross-border co-operation is vital in halting the tide of unscrupulous behaviour."

The results of the Africa forum would be presented to a global forum on corruption in Johannesburg next week. 

"We will call on all states to intensify co-operation and deepen the global onslaught against corruption."

Fraser Moloketi said she would approach business next month to support a mass communication campaign to publicise the national anticorruption hotline (0800 701 701), promote whistle-blowing and make business aware of the legal requirement to report any attempts to engage in corrupt practice.

She said: "Civil society organs have a crucial role to play in developing public awareness of corruption and its implications." But she also warned: "Organs of civil society are not immune to corruption themselves, and do not always measure up to the standards of probity and openness they demand of others."

Michael Hamlyn

Business Report



End of Document