



Open Democracy Bill goes for more scrutiny
IR - News Watch

Open Democracy Bill goes for more scrutiny

Reported on: 8 November 1999

Political parties in Parliament will consider proposals this week to revise the Open Democracy Bill into three pieces of separate legislation ­ the right to information; the right to privacy and the protection of whistle blowers. 

The proposals come in the wake of the unanimous decision by the Justice Portfolio Committee in Parliament last week to remove the privacy sections of the Bill and make it into a separate piece of legislation. 

Earlier the committee had also agreed to remove the section on the protection of whistle blowers so that it could also be drawn up separately. 

As it currently stands, the 50­page Bill gives effect to an individual's Constitutional "right of access to any information held by the state; to provide people with access to personal information held by private bodies and to provide for the correction of personal information held by state or private bodies". 

The Bill states that it seeks to ensure the right of privacy with regulations on the "use and disclosure of that information". 

The section on the protection of whistle blowers in the Bill aims to "provide for the protection of persons disclosing evidence of contraventions of the law, serious maladministration or corruption in governmental bodies". 

With the Bill divided into three, it is probable that it would have to be renamed to reflect its narrower focus on the right of access to information, according to Johnny De Lange, the committee's chairperson. Keeping the Bill as is would result in "legislative chaos", he added. If political parties agree with the proposal, the Bill would only reflect the right of access to information held by government and private bodies. 

Government bodies are defined as any department of state or administration in the national, provincial or local sphere of government or any other functionary or institution exercising a power or performing a duty in terms of the Constitution or provincial constitution. 

However, these provisions will exclude Cabinet, a court or a judicial officer from being compelled to provide information under this legislation. The Bill also calls for the Human Rights Commission to publish an easy­to­read guide in all the official languages within six months of it being passed as law. The HRC will also have the power to exempt any organ of government from providing information to the public if it is considered not in the national interest. 

Government would also have to appoint special information officers to deal with the public requests for information. The contact details of these information officers would have to be published in the telephone directory. 

The Sowetan 

Waghied Misbach 



End of Document