



Multi-faceted dragon under attack
IR - News Watch

Multi-faceted dragon under attack

Reported on: 20 November 1998

The business community will have an important role to play in ensuring that the government's drive to root out corruption from South African life succeeds. This was the clear message from the recent public sector conference held in parliament to prepare for a national conference on corruption in Durban in February. 

"The private sector must form part of the solution, not part of the problem, in the reform of public procurement and (the creation of) other measures to combat corruption," said a statement released at the end of the conference. 

Since Cabinet decided in 1997 to make the battle against corruption a number one priority no less than 11 different state agencies have been established. 

The best known are the Heath Commission and the Public Protector's Office. 

It has also been asked if government should not consider establishing an independent and centralised anti-corruption agency such as are found in Hong Kong, Singapore and New South Wales in Australia. 

But many believe the agencies now in place are adequate, although they should co-ordinate efforts and exchange information more. 

The suggestion that a specialised corruption court be established to increase the speed with which corruption cases are tried has found broad favour, especially in light of the overloaded criminal justice system. 

But how do we make what we have more effective? 

Much depends on how much money the government is prepared to spend. 

It will be no use staffing anti-corruption agencies with people who have no experience in unearthing sophisticated scams. 

Civil society will also have to be drawn in. Not only can it play an important "whistle-blowing" role but it can help spread the awareness that corruption is wrong and can be punished. This will be the tricky bit. 

The whole concept of "whistle-blowing" is problematic as no protection currently exists in law to prevent those who report corruption from being victimised. This will be catered for in the Open Democracy Bill, due out next year after much prevarication by government. 

At the conference much was said about the need for "ethical renewal" and the need to develop a civil service "with public interests to profess rather than private interests to confess". 

Departments were encouraged to develop codes of conduct, and it was hoped that the "Batho Pele" (people first) campaign launched by the public service would increase public interest and awareness. 

Corruption can be a purely internal thing, such as when civil servants draw salaries for "ghost" workers, but it is often most widespread in government procurement programmes. This is where the role of business is particularly crucial. 

Bernie Fanaroff, the director of the national crime prevention strategy, told the conference he was particularly worried about the potential for corruption in the large and complex information technology (IT) purchases that government would have to make in the near future. 

He said a thorough review of how the different components of these complex systems were bought was needed to ensure that government was not continually being defrauded. 

He said there would always be a problem with the quality of equipment bought by the state from unscrupulous suppliers. 

The over-specification of equipment or works was another tricky area as these could be framed in such a way that only certain people could benefit or charge inflated prices. 

The appointment of consultants and other professional services could also be a problem area. Fanaroff said there had been many examples of nepotism. 

He was also concerned that the sale of state land and property could result in officials or their families and friends developing consortia to buy the assets with inside help. 

The conference heard of many other examples of corruption that had been uncovered in the civil service. 

Again and again the reaction was that there should be "zero tolerance" for this "multifaceted dragon with many and warted heads". as Judge Willem Heath described it. 

The new Treasury Control Bill, which aims to establish a national treasury and common norms and standards for financial control in all government bodies, is expected to go a long way towards ensuring the kind of financial and management controls needed to stem internal corruption in government. 

The proposed bill has met with opposition from some entities who believe it will compromise their financial independence. It is now being fine-tuned by a special parliamentary subcommittee. 

It will therefore only see the light of day next year. 

In the meantime we will have to rely on the awareness created at the conference being filtered through to staff at all levels that corruption is a big "no, no" in government.

Mercury Business Report 

Lynda Loxton 



End of Document