



Intervention is needed to enforce protection of whistle-blowers
IR - News Watch

Intervention is needed to enforce protection of whistle-blowers 

Reported on: 12 July 2005

The cornerstone of the employment relationship as recognised by labour legislation is the question of trust. 

Both employer and employee have to trust each other for the employment relationship to work. A breakdown of this trust relationship, more often than not, must lead to a breakdown of the employment relationship, which leads to a dismissal or a resignation. 

Over the past decade, since the formation of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration and the labour court, employers have been enjoined to justify dismissals by claiming that the trust relationship had broken down.

However, the Protected Disclosures Act creates an enormous problem and an exception to the rule. An employee who is a whistle-blower and makes a disclosure that is protected by the act ought to be protected from dismissal. 

In fact, the legislation goes one step further. The Labour Relations Act says that an employee's dismissal because of a protected disclosure is an automatic unfair dismissal and damages of up to two years' salary can be ordered. 

Disclosure by the employee can be protected only if the disclosure is made in good faith and is substantially in accordance with the procedure outlined by the legislation. 

The legislation specifically points out that this employee, having made a protected disclosure as defined in the act, should not face the wrath of the employer. 

In practice, however, this is not the case. Employees seeking the protection of the legislation on whistle-blowers have not been successful in retaining their jobs. More often than not these employees are victimised and it can safely be stated that 90 percent lose their positions. Employers face the choice of keeping the employee or dismissing him or her because of the breakdown of the trust relationship.

Once disclosure has been made, the employment relationship is threatened. Despite the legal protections, most cases lead to dismissal and litigation. 

Invariably, the litigation leads to damages and not to a reinstatement. In essence an employee has a hard choice: make the disclosure, which is normally the moral thing to do, or protect the job. Jobs are few, and most employees make the choice of silence.

In an interesting decision in the case of Grieve versus Denel, Grieve, who was employed as a safety and security manager, disclosed certain allegations against his general manager to his employer. 

This disclosure led to a suspension and a charge of misconduct. Before the disciplinary hearing, Grieve approached the labour court requesting an interdict against the company from holding the hearing. 

The court came to Grieve's assistance and stopped the disciplinary inquiry. However, this was done only on an interim basis pending the determination of the dispute. 

This was one of the few examples where the employee had the resources to tackle the company and was partially successful.

In the recent Andisa Securities case, the whistle-blower was dismissed and chose to challenge this dismissal in the labour court. The issue is not whether the employee will be successful but whether the legislation is really accomplishing what it set out to do - protect employees.

The fact that the employee was dismissed and had to challenge the dismissal in the court shows how unsuccessful the legislation has been. We need legislative intervention to ensure that employees remain anonymous and are able to keep their careers intact.

The Business Report

Michael Bagraim



End of Document