



Officials face zero tolerance
IR - News Watch

Officials face zero tolerance

Reported on: 11 November 1998

Corrupt public officials who were "parasites in our land" would find zero tolerance exercised against them, Deputy President Mbeki said yesterday. 

Delivering the keynote address at a major public sector anti-corruption conference at parliament, Mr Mbeki vowed severe punishment would be meted out against corrupt officials who had contributed to "moral mayhem" in society. 

The conference is being attended by more than 200 political leaders including several cabinet ministers, national, provincial and local authority leaders, organised labour leaders in the public sector and also parastatal representatives. 

The threatening state of moral degradation in our society was reflected in the high levels of crime, disrespect for authority and the rule of law and the erosion of key institutions such as the family, Mr Mbeki said. 

The conference has been called to address endemic corruption in society and to prepare for a major national summit on corruption planned for February. 

In a shocking indication of corruption in the country, Judge Willem Heath, the special investigations unit chief, said in his report released earlier this year that his team had discovered more than R6,2 billion in missing cash or assets in anti-corruption cases ­ many dating back to the apartheid era. 

Mr Mbeki said steps in the campaign against corruption would include a beefed-up "whistle-blowing system" and the development of more efficient monitoring and management systems to put the brakes on corrupt activities. 

Other measures would include the strengthening of the criminal justice system through the development of investigative and preventative strategies, the development of a risk assessment "early warning" system, and new anti-corruption legislation. 

Mr Mbeki said the organisational culture of the public sector, "must change with a paradigm shift from external sanctions (when misconduct is belatedly addressed) to stronger internal control with anticipatory management systems to check deviant behaviour". 

"Sound administrative values of probity, trust, justice and fairness must be integrated into the daily work ethic and not kept as an issue for social concern only," Mr Mbeki said. 

Mr Salie Manie, the conference chairman, said that the first day had been characterised by a "hands-on and practical approach". 

While today had been set aside for recommendations to combat corruption, concrete proposals to this effect had already emerged. 

One of the most noteworthy was removing impediments which made it extremely difficult to act against corrupt officials.

The Mercury 

Andre Koopman 



End of Document