



#MeToo and the public broadcaster: as the silence ends so the backlash starts
IR - Weekly Comment

#MeToo and the public broadcaster: as the silence ends so the backlash starts

In June 2018, amid allegations of s exual misconduct, including accusations of s exual harassment and s ex for jobs, the public broadcaster – the SABC – announced that it was establishing an independent Commission of Inquiry into S exual Harassment to conduct an organization-wide inquiry on the extent of the problem, and ‘the role of institutional culture in enabling it.’1 

The findings of the commission were made public in November 20182 and were critical of how the organization had failed to address the problem, in violation of the complainants’ rights. This kicked into action a process of redress and giving voice to the complainants. A backlash followed.3 

The commission was unequivocal in its report that the SABC had failed to implement its S exual Harassment Policy and was non-compliant with the provisions of the Employment Equity Act and the Code of Good Practice on the Handing of S exual Harassment Cases in the Workplace. 

The extent to which the organization was derelict in its legal duties is troubling, with the report having found that –

‘HR and most Senior Managers demonstrated a serious lack of knowledge and understanding of human rights statutes, gender relations and issues of power relations between men and women. In the process, they have been complicit in the violation of the rights of complainants.’4

In this context of organizational failure, the vulnerability of the complainants (10 complainants and 7 whistleblowers lodged cases of harassment with the commission) was particularly stark:

‘Failure to handle cases in line with policies and the law led to the premature resignation from jobs by all but one complainant whilst all alleged perpetrators still enjoy their senior jobs and perks. Most complainants remain unemployed, still emotional and depressed and angry. The one still in the employ of the SABC continues to suffer victimization for reporting the case.’5

On the other hand; ‘no alleged perpetrator was ever suspended or found guilty of s exual harassment even though this was the main complaint. Those charged (often supervisors to complainants) were allowed to work (victimization not monitored) and then were found guilty of unprofessional behavior, (not s exual harassment) where cases went so far.’6

A compounding factor is that the complainants, with the exception of two, were freelancers. As such, their appointment – and termination – was vested in line managers who could abuse this position of power, offering jobs for s exual favours. According to an employee who testified to the commission, at one radio station ‘the men there regarded the station as their fiefdom and the freelance journalists as their harems.’

In this regard, the commission report concludes that the ‘policy on appointment of freelancers is … problematic because it gives excessive power to one or few individuals’ and recommends that the ‘practice needs to change … so that the process can be more inclusive of other decision makers through interviewing panels with the positions advertised in line with normal standard recruitment procedures.’7

In response to the commission’s findings and recommendations, the SABC’s executive management was instructed ‘to implement the recommendations with immediate effect’ and the commission ‘was appointed as the body to monitor the implementation of the recommendations and to provide regular feedback to the board.’8

Taking the bull by the horns, as it were, the SABC acted swiftly and the individual cases reported to the commission were reopened to be dealt with in terms of SABC policy and the law. In December, the SABC indicated that the alleged perpetrators, including managers in the organization, who were identified in the commission report had been suspended, pending internal disciplinary hearings.9

Insightfully, the acting CEO, at the time, Nomsa Philiso, explained that the enquiry by the commission at the SABC was about ‘resetting the tone of our values’ while acknowledging the dark side of human behaviour in her statement that:

‘I do not have any illusion that when we finish this inquiry that those things will not happen again because our society is what it is. What I'm hoping for, is that it starts to change the tone …. By keeping quiet I believe that to a large extent we're enabling [s exual misconduct].’10

Inviting a #MeToo moment at the SABC, the commission of enquiry opened the space for ‘people … [to] be able to tell the SABC about s exual harassment and abuse they've experienced - … [inviting] … both SABC staffers, as well as freelancers who've worked or are working for the SABC, as well as people who've never worked for the SABC but have had interaction with the public broadcaster and encountered s exual harassment or abuse.’11

The gesture was significant, and perhaps necessary in the circumstances; and the consequences – some of it a backlash against the outcome – are likely to be felt for some time still. 

What are the lessons then, for organisations, or individuals within organisations, who are concerned about their own practices? 

Most likely (hopefully) the practice in most organisations does not warrant a #MeToo response and a comprehensive commission of inquiry as required by SABC. And the answer may even be provided in the first part of the recommendations contained in the commission’s report. These recommendations are generic and serve as a good reminder of what our duties in this regard entail. These include:

‘1)  [The] … need for the overarching training of all staff on gender equality and human rights with a particular focus on gender equality, violence against women taking into consideration the current trends and context. …

2)  [The] need to develop a culture that embraces the enhancement of human rights and gender rights. 

3)  [The need for] … an induction programme to ensure that employees are inducted into the culture of the Corporation and various policies. In the absence of corporate culture, everybody does as they pleases. 

4)  [The need for] … diversity management and … a culture of acceptance and respect for the diverse cultures in the organisation. 

5)  The … s exual harassment policy needs to be reviewed to be in line with international law, … [organizational] policies and domestic laws. To supplement the policy, a standard operating procedure or policy guidelines must be put in place to give teeth to the s exual harassment policy. 

6)  [The organization] should provide a budget and other resources for the effective and full implementation of a s exual harassment policy. 

7)  [The organization] should introduce a gender desk or gender focal points. 

8)  [Understand that] … [t]he almost parity between women and men in employment figures does not translate into … a gender responsive work environment.’

It is not always necessary to bring in independent expertise, but it might be wise to do so when an organization’s culture is in crisis or where management is complicit or compromised. It is also important to bear in mind the extent of the (often unseen) burden on complainants, particularly women. For example, in the SABC case, the current position is that ‘[m]ost of the complainants do not have jobs and medical aid to access counselling and this is a service all require.’12

Complainants need to be heard and to be protected from hostile environments. And in this respect, the interests of the complainant are aligned with those of the organization. 

Until next week,

Debbie Collier.



Footnotes
1	   SABC Media Statement, Findings and Recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into S exual Harassment, November 2018 (Commission Report). Available online at http://www.sabc.co.za/sabc/findings-and-recommendations-of-the-commission-of-inquiry-into-sexual-harassment/ .
2	   Ibid.
3	   See http://city-press.news24.com/News/outcry-over-sabc-sex-report-20190611 .
4	   Commission Report, Findings and Recommendations at para. 8.
5	   Commission Report, Findings and Recommendations at para. 9.
6	   Commission Report, Findings and Recommendations at para. 7.
7	   Commission Report, Findings and Recommendation at para. 11.
8	   Commission Report, Conclusion.
9	   See http://mg.co.za/article/2018-12-07-sabc-suspends-sex-for-jobs-pests .
10	   https://www.channel24.co.za/TV/News/sabc-joins-metoo-with-inquiry-into-sexual-harassment-20180601 .
11	   http://www.channel24.co.za/TV/News/sabc-joins-metoo-with-inquiry-into-sexual-harassment-20180601 
12	   Commission Report, Findings and Recommendations at para. 3 


End of Document