



'Travelgate whistleblower' fights parliament
IR - News Watch

'Travelgate whistleblower' fights parliament

Reported on: 22 March 2007

The man dubbed the Travelgate whistleblower, Harry Charlton, and his former employer, parliament, will endure yet another face-off in the Cape Town Labour Court Friday.

Charlton's lawyer, John MacRobert, said in a statement released earlier this week that Charlton opposed parliament's notice of exception filed in the Labour Court and that the hearing will be held Friday.

Parliament argued that the Protected Disclosures Act (also known as the "whistleblowers act") does not apply to Charlton because his disclosures about MPs did not fall within the meaning of the Protected Disclosures Act.

The matter will be heard in the Labour Court and will be argued on only the papers that have been filed and no evidence will be lead.

MacRobert explained that the exceptions raised by parliament do not relate to Charlton's substantive claim for unfair dismissal or his claim that he was unfairly suspended.

Meanwhile, parliament has appointed a new chief financial officer, Daphline O'Brien.

Charlton was fired more than a year ago after a disciplinary hearing found him guilty of a dozen counts of misconduct. These were not related to Travelgate but Charlton is claiming his zealous role in uncovering the scam led to his falling from favour with parliament. 

Charlton claimed in a sworn affidavit that a number of high-ranking politicians were implicated in the fraud totalling about R19-million and that his investigation was blocked.

Parliament has hired audit firm Ernst & Young to assist members facing Travelgate-related queries from liquidators.

The auditors were reportedly employed because due to the resignation of a senior administration official last year, MPs could not establish whether or not past travel billings under scrutiny by liquidators were legitimate.

More than 200 MPs last year received letters from liquidators of Bathong Travel Agency, the last of the Travelgate agencies to go under.

Many of the claims being investigated are understood to involve complex networks of travel bookings and cancellations. 

Some turned out to be legitimate travel by MPs involved in committee work.

Linda Daniels

Iol.co.za



End of Document