



Financial irregularities and protected disclosures
IR - Weekly Comment

Financial irregularities and protected disclosures

In the context of protected disclosures, occupational detriments and measures taken by employees to prevent their employers from taking disciplinary action against them for making a protected disclosure, most of the cases we’ve had up till now came from the public sector – either government departments or statutory bodies. But the decision of the Labour Court in Randles v Chemical Specialities Ltd  (2010) 19 LC 11.5.2 shows that the issues of protected disclosures arise in the private sector as well. 

The employee in this case, the Group Legal Counsel, had been an attorney for a number of years. He was also appointed a director of the company. Soon after the employee joined the company, its Financial Director resigned, but before doing so, the Financial Director wrote a letter to the Board, setting out a number of financial issues. One of the issues raised was a loan made to one of the other Directors. Other letters and e-mails about the running of the company, personal travelling and even the purchase of a helicopter followed. 

The relationship between the employee and the company took a turn for the worse as a dispute arose about the shares to which the employee would be entitled. The employee resigned as a Director, but stayed on as an employee. He felt it would be inappropriate to resign as Director without giving the Board full reasons for this step, and in his reasons he again raised some of the alleged financial mismanagement. 

The employee then initiated High Court legal proceedings for his share entitlement. The employee then issued another 10-page document for the attention of the Board of Directors. In this memorandum the employee made a number of allegations – expressly stating, at the beginning of the document, that it constituted a protected disclosure. The Board’s response was an undertaking that it would investigate the matter. 

The Chief Executive Officer, the person at the centre of the storm (and the allegations made) gave instructions to have the employee’s salary investigated, together with some lease agreements the employee had entered into on behalf of the company. It turned out that the employee had indeed signed two lease agreements without Board approval. The employee received a charge sheet containing disciplinary charges relating to the lease agreements. At the same time, the company failed to pay his thirteenth cheque. When asked about the thirteenth cheque, the CEO indicated that he was not happy with the employee’s explanation about his salary and that the company’s position was that the employee had been overpaid by more than R1 million. 

The employee was then suspended pending the disciplinary enquiry, and on the same day he sent a copy of his report to the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (the company was listed). It then turned into full war between the parties: the employee was told to disclose his computer password, the computer was examined by a forensic computer investigator, and the report indicated that pornographic material was found on the employee’s computer. So another charge followed. 

One of the employer’s arguments was that in participating in the disciplinary enquiry, the employee had given up or waived his rights to protected under the Protected Disclosures Act. After considering the preamble to the PDA, the Labour Court dismissed this argument, saying that an employee cannot lawfully waive or give up his rights under the PDA by electing to participate in a disciplinary enquiry. 

The Labour Court found that the employee had complied with the requirements of section  6 of the Protected Disclosures Act: the disclosure, the Court found, had not been made for the purposes of personal gain. His making the disclosure had been reasonable. The Court also had little problem finding that the employee had been subjected to an occupational detriment (the suspension and the enquiry) because of the employee’s having made a protected disclosure. 

The Court then interdicted the employer from proceeding with any disciplinary action or enquiry pending the outcome of a dispute referred to the CCMA (conciliation). The final decision about the matter would have to be taken by the Labour Court (this present case was just an urgent application for interim relief). 

‘Till next week 

Carl Mischke



End of Document