



DA challenges Manase report in court
IR - News Watch

DA challenges Manase report in court

Reported on: 04 September 2012 

Durban - The DA is going to court to force the eThekwini city council to make public the Manase Report – the document the provincial government paid R14.9 million for to probe R1.2 billion of suspect transactions and maladministration in the municipality. 

The report was handed to the city’s ANC bosses seven months ago and named 135 councillors and officials for fraud and corruption. It has not been released despite repeated calls from opposition parties and requests from the media. 

DA chief whip Dean Macpherson said on Monday that the party’s lawyers were preparing a court challenge for application as soon as possible. While this was in progress, a series of public meetings would be held to gauge feeling on making the document public and a march on city hall was planned. 

“No single person in the report has been criminally charged or dismissed. This includes 10 councillors who were named in the report, some of whom are repeat offenders for doing business with the municipality,” Macpherson said. 

Only city manager S’bu Sithole, mayor James Nxumalo and a handful of senior ANC politicians have been privy to it. 

Last month Nxumalo said the report would be released by the end of December when all the internal disciplinary hearings had been completed. 

He said the city was not ready to release the document as it prejudiced those involved and jeopardised municipal interests. It contained the names of the whistle- blowers, he said, who might be called to give evidence at disciplinary hearings. 

DA MP John Steenhuisen said it was being used for political purposes and was being withheld from the public because it had political implications ahead of the ANC’s national conference in Mangaung in December. 

DA caucus leader Tex Collins said he had read the full report, but could not divulge its contents because he was bound by a confidentiality clause. 

Municipal spokesman Thabo Mofokeng said the DA had a right to go to court. 

“We maintain that all political parties have full access to the report. Internal disciplinary processes are ongoing and when the time is right the report will be released. We do not want to compromise internal disciplinary processes,” he said. 

Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs spokesman Lennox Mabaso said the department was happy about the progress being made by eThekwini. 

All weaknesses in the municipality were being attended to through “political will and the strong administrative hand at the helm of eThekwini. The investigation has ushered in a new era of governance in eThekwini,” he said. 

Former city manager Michael Sutcliffe, who was implicated by Manase, cautioned city bosses against releasing it in its current form saying it was full of gaps and inconsistencies. 

There were many instances where the Manase investigators were unsure of their own investigation and said allegations should be put to individuals and that they must be allowed to respond, Sutcliffe warned. 

“The report must only be released after the gaps have been investigated and addressed. I would advocate for the release of any report that has been properly investigated and concluded,” he said. 

He was shocked to hear how much the probe cost when the city did not even pay two-thirds of that amount for the auditor general to review R30 billion of the city’s books. 

“The auditor general costs us less than R10 million,” he said. 

Nxumalo has been accused of reneging twice on his promise that political parties that used the Promotion of Access to Information Act would get the complete report and annexures by July 16 and make it accessible by the end of July 

Gugu Mbonambi

The Mercury



End of Document