



Watchdog investigates Olympus as chief quits
IR - News Watch

Watchdog investigates Olympus as chief quits

Reported on: 27 October 2011 

Olympus head Tsuyoshi Kikukawa resigned yesterday after a scandal over hefty advisory fees wiped out half of the 92-year-old firm’s market value, but his successor stuck with the company’s line that it had done nothing wrong. 

Sources said Japan’s securities watchdog was looking into past Olympus takeover deals, focusing on whether it had properly disclosed relevant information. 

Olympus fired its British president and chief executive, Michael Woodford, on October 14, two weeks after his appointment as chief executive, saying he failed to understand the company’s management style and Japanese culture. Chairman Kikukawa then took over Woodford’s role. 

Woodford, who joined the camera and endoscope maker in 1980, said he was sacked for questioning a $687 million (R5.4 billion now) advisory fee paid in relation to a $2.2bn takeover in 2008 as well as other deals, and for urging Kikukawa to step down. 

“For now the stock should rebound on his resignation, but in reality nothing has been cleared up. There are still many investigations left to come,” said Koichi Ogawa, the chief portfolio manager at Daiwa SB Investments. 

Woodford said that Kikukawa’s resignation was “a start” but said his replacement – Shuichi Takayama, a company veteran – had also failed to demand explanations about hefty fees linked to acquisitions. 

Takayama sniped back at the former chief executive turned whistle-blower, telling a news conference there was no problem with fees paid by Olympus and that the company was extremely angry that Woodford had revealed internal information. 

“I was one of those who agreed to Woodford’s dismissal. The reason was his autocratic actions, and these included intimidation of my own staff.” 

Kikukawa said in a separate statement he had stepped down to restore confidence in the company under the new management and that he would continue to work as a director. 

Olympus shares fell 7.6 percent yesterday and have lost more than half their value since Woodford was sacked.

Reuters 

Business Report



End of Document