



Hoho v Eastern Cape Legislature: bringing the employer into disrepute is no laughing matter
IR - Weekly Comment

Hoho v Eastern Cape Legislature: bringing the employer into disrepute is no laughing matter

The employment relationship between the Legislature of the Eastern Cape and Mr Kerr Hoho (‘Hoho’) was a difficult one, giving rise to a long, and interesting, trail of awards and judgments, including an SCA judgment confirming that defamation can still constitute a criminal offence.1 The CCMA award in Hoho / Secretary of the Legislature – Eastern Cape (2019) 28 CCMA 8.37.7 also reported at [2019] 5 BALR 490 (CCMA) is the latest in this string of cases; and the CCMA, in this case, confirms the sanction of dismissal for ‘[m]aking and publicizing derogatory, inflammatory, defamatory and insinuative remarks about and against fellow employees.’2

The Eastern Cape Legislature had employed Hoho as a researcher (from at least 2001) and, in 2011, he was charged with ‘misconduct related to his disruptive behaviour towards colleagues and members of the Legislature, abusing email communications media to do so and as a result bringing the Legislature into disrepute.’3

This was not the first time that Hoho faced such allegations: he had in fact previously been convicted in the Bisho High Court on a number of counts for ‘having “compiled, produced and/or published” several leaflets during the period 2001 to 2002 [while employed by the Legislature as a researcher] in which he defamed the Speaker of the Legislature of the Eastern Cape Province … , the Premier of the Eastern Cape Province, members of the Legislature … [among others]. In these leaflets allegations of, amongst others, corruption, bribery, financial embezzlement, s exual impropriety, illegal abortion and fraud were made.’4

The 2011 allegations of misconduct resulted in a disciplinary enquiry, and ultimately his dismissal. Hoho approached the CCMA, challenging the fairness of his dismissal. It was these proceedings that were (still) the subject matter, many years later, in Hoho / Secretary of the Legislature – Eastern Cape (2019) 28 CCMA 8.37.7 also reported at [2019] 5 BALR 490 (CCMA). 

In bullet-point form, resolution of the matter progressed (or regressed?), from the date of dismissal in 2011 as follows:

 CCMA (1) - 2012: 

 Commissioner M, in arbitration proceedings, found the dismissal to be fair; and that ‘the unrepentant nature of [Hoho], his previous disciplinary record, any reasonable decision maker could have arrived at the decision of the [employer].’5

 Unhappy with this outcome, Hoho took the CCMA award on review.

 Labour Court (1): 

 The outcome of the review application was that, ‘[t]he finding of … misconduct was not disturbed. However, it was held that the test used to determine the sanction … misconceived the nature of the enquiry … in short … [the commissioner] asked the wrong question and in doing so applied the wrong test.’6 

 In these circumstances, the parties agreed, ‘the matter should be referred back to the same Commissioner for him to conduct the enquiry into an appropriate sanction on the basis of the test established by Sidumo.’7

 CCMA (2): 

 Commissioner M had already resigned from the CCMA before the matter was referred back and, after reaching consensus with the parties, the matter was assigned to Commissioner V to resume the CCMA proceedings. Commissioner V heard evidence relating to the sanction and found the sanction of dismissal to be fair.

 Again, unhappy with the outcome in the CCMA, Hoho took the award on review.

 Labour Court (2):

 The grounds of review included a contention that ‘[t]he matter should have been referred to Commissioner M only’ and that ‘the decision on sanction … was not rationally connected to the “information” before the hearing and certain of the fresh evidence was ignored.’8

 Hoho’s application for review was dismissed by the Labour Court; and, unhappy about this, Hoho appealed the decision of the Labour Court.

 Labour Appeal Court (1):9

 On appeal, the LAC confined its enquiry to the question of the competence of Commissioner V to have heard the matter after it was referred back to the CCMA for a re-consideration of the question of sanction. After all:

‘it is abundantly plain from the order granted by [the Labour Court], and the rationale in the judgment … that the order contemplated only Commissioner M hearing the matter and no other person. No less important is that the rationale for doing so was to speedily expedite the conclusion of the case, premised on Commissioner M being steeped in the facts of the case. Moreover, it is not plausible to read the order as contemplating further evidence being adduced; …. It might be an open question whether further argument might be heard on the record which undoubtedly would, generically, be of assistance in the resumed decision-making process, but a resumption of a hearing for more than that, is inconsistent with the order.’10

While the LAC acknowledged that there may be circumstances where Commissioner M could not re-consider the matter and an alternative Commissioner would need to be appointed; however, this was not the case here. Accordingly, the matter was referred back to the CCMA for the issue of sanction to be re-considered within 90 days; with a direction that ‘the parties may … address argument at the hearing on the issue of sanction, with reference to the record of the proceedings before Commissioner M.’11

 CCMA (3) - 2018:12

In his award, Commissioner M recites the passages in Sidumo which articulate his duty; being ‘to determine whether a dismissal is fair or not.’ And, in doing so, that he must ‘take into account the totality of circumstances’ including ‘the importance of the rule … breached … the reason the employer imposed the sanction of dismissal … the basis of the employee’s challenge to the dismissal … the harm caused by the employee’s conduct, … [the possibility of] additional training and instruction, the effect of dismissal on the employee and his or her long-service record.’13

In the award, Commissioner M considers the seriousness of the offences; and, in response in Hoho’s submissions that he is remorseful and, what seems to be a commitment to undergoing anger management counselling, the commissioner elaborates on ‘the threshold of genuineness that is required from an employee who is expected to work at restoring a broken relationship’.14

Commissioner M is careful to consider ‘the totality of circumstances’ including the nature of the work and the issue of long service. In this regard, taking into account the fact that the employee is required to work independently and unsupervised; that his conduct has significantly harmed the workplace; and that he has ‘previously been handed a Final Written Warning which shows a propensity of transgressing on his part’,15 he finds that the sanction of dismissal is fair. 

There is a twist in the award, however. In the final paragraphs he indicates that, contrary to the applicable Code of the Legislature, the hearing was chaired by an external person and that this was procedurally unfair, but, because there was no prejudice as a result, there is no award for compensation.

There are complex issues in the circumstances of this case: around the duties of an employee; about the appropriate channels for an employee to ‘whistleblow’ when he or she perceives wrongdoing of fellow-employees; and about managing the health and well-being, and mental stability of employees. It also raises questions about how to optimise the processes at, and between, the CCMA and the Labour/Labour Appeal Court. In the meanwhile, all bets are open as to whether the matter will end here. 

Until next week,

Debbie Collier.



Footnotes
1	   In Hoho v S [2009] 1 All SA 103 (SCA)
2	   At para [32].
3	   At para [1].
4	   Hoho v S [2009] at para [2].
5	   NEHAWU obo Hoho v CCMA & others 92018) 27 LAC 1.11.18 also reported at [2018] 8 BLLR 768 (LAC) at para [1].
6	   Ibid at para [2].
7	   Ibid at para [3].
8	   Ibid at para [8].
9	   This is the decision in NEHAWU obo Hoho v CCMA & others [2018] 8 BLLR 768 (LAC).
10	   Ibid at para [11].
11	   Item (5) of the Order.
12	   This is the award handed down in Hoho / Secretary of the Legislature – Eastern Cape (2019) 28 CCMA 8.37.7 also reported at [2019] 5 BALR 490 (CCMA)
13	   Ibid at paras [29] and [30], citing Sidumo at para [78] and [79]
14	   Ibid at para [42].
15	   Ibid at para [49].


End of Document