



Dismissal for lodging an unfounded grievance: automatically unfair?
IR - Weekly Comment

Dismissal for lodging an unfounded grievance: automatically unfair?

Section 187 of the LRA designates a specific category of dismissals as being automatically unfair. Such dismissals, which generally arise out of an infringement of the fundamental rights of employees, are distinct from dismissals for misconduct, incapacity and operational requirements which are regulated by sections 188 and 189 of the Act respectively. The distinction between automatically unfair dismissals and ordinary dismissals is that in the case of the former i) an employer can raise no justification based on general principles of fairness and ii) the employee can claim increased compensation up to a maximum of 24 months remuneration. Establishing the true reason for the dismissal is therefore of vital importance. 

In DBT Technologies (Pty) Ltd v Ariela Garnevska (LAC) [JA61/2018 18 May 2020] the LAC considered an appeal against the finding of the Labour Court which held that the employee’s dismissal was automatically unfair in terms of s 187(1)(d) of the LRA. Section 187(1) (d) provides that a dismissal is automatically unfair if the reason for the dismissal is “that the employee took action, or indicated an intention to take action, against the employer by – (i) exercising any right conferred by this Act or (ii) participating in any proceedings in terms of this Act.”

In this matter the employee claimed that the reason for her dismissal was that she had lodged a grievance against a fellow employee. The employer claimed that the employee was dismissed for dishonesty in relation to the allegedly false accusations upon which the grievance was founded. 

Whether a dismissal is automatically unfair is essentially an enquiry into its causation and whether the reason for the dismissal was one of the grounds listed in section 187(1) of the LRA. A causal nexus is established by a twofold test of factual and legal causation, as propounded by the court in SA Chemical Workers Union v Afrox Ltd [1999] 10 BLLR 1005 (LAC); (1999) ILJ 1718 (LAC). Factual causation is established by asking whether the dismissal would have occurred if the employee had not taken action against the employer. If the answer is yes, then the dismissal is not automatically unfair. If the answer is no the next issue is one of legal causation, namely whether the taking of action against the employer was the main, dominant, proximate or most likely cause of the dismissal. The Labour Court, in finding that the employee’s dismissal was automatically unfair, had found that the evidence established “a causal nexus between the respondent exercising her rights to institute a grievance and her dismissal.” 

The issue upon which the appeal centred was whether the lodging of a grievance could be interpreted as constituting “the exercise of any right conferred by the LRA”. The LAC noted that the LRA does not expressly confer rights upon employees to file grievances or regulate the resolution of such grievances. This is an entitlement that arises ex contractu - derived as an express or implied term of the employment contract or from a collective agreement. Furthermore, the court noted, the filing of a grievance about another employee’s conduct does not constitute action taken “against an employer” as required by s187(1)(d), or involve the direct exercise of a statutory right. The LAC accordingly concluded that this provision is not concerned with the filing of a grievance and that the employee had failed to prove that she was automatically unfairly dismissed. However the court pointed out that, should the evidence prove that the employee was dismissed for filing a grievance, the dismissal would undisputedly be substantively unfair. 

Section 191(5) of the LRA confers jurisdiction on the Labour Court to resolve automatically unfair dismissal disputes, after the conciliation process has run its course. With regard to the resolution of “ordinary dismissal” disputes the CCMA is conferred with exclusive jurisdiction to arbitrate such disputes. In terms of s 158(2) of the LRA, if at any stage after a dispute has been referred to the Labour Court it becomes apparent that the dispute ought to have been referred to arbitration, the Labour Court may stay the proceedings and refer the dispute to arbitration or if it is expedient to do so continue with the proceedings as if it were an arbitrator. The LAC noted that, in this matter, the employee had made no request in her statement of case for the Labour Court to act in terms of s 158(2) in the event that it was found to lack jurisdiction - thus concluding that the Labour Court erred in assuming jurisdiction over the dispute. 

In reaching its conclusion the LAC overturned the finding of the Labour Court in Mackay v Absa Group and another (1999) 8 LC 8.29.3; [1999] 12 BLLR 1317 (LC) (followed and applied in De Klerk v Cape Union Mart International (Pty) Ltd (C620/2011) [2012] ZALCCT 22 that had held that the exercise of a right to lodge a grievance conferred by a private agreement between the employer and the employee falls with the ambit of s 187(1)(d). In Mackay the Labour Court accepted that the LRA does not make explicit provision protecting an employee who lodges a grievance against his employer. However it was prepared to adopt a purposive interpretation of s 187(1)(d) - in keeping with the constitutional guarantee of fair labour practices and the main object of the LRA, being to regulate and govern the relationship between employee and employer and resolve all labour disputes effectively. On this basis the court was satisfied that the exercise of a right conferred by a private agreement binding on the employer and employee as well as participation in any proceeding provided for by such agreement was also contemplated in s 187(1)(d). In reaching its conclusion that court noted that “[i]t is the duty of this court to ensure that employees are able to exercise any of their rights without fear of losing their jobs or being ill-treated in any way.” [para 32]

In rejecting the ratio of the court in Mackay as being “misdirected” the court in DBT Technologies (Pty) Ltd held that 

“There is no need to read into the language of section 187(1)(d) of the LRA an additional species of automatically unfair dismissal in order to give effect to the constitutional right to fair labour practices or to advance effective dispute resolution… Section 187(1) of the LRA explicitly carves out particular kinds of egregious employer conduct for adjudication exclusively by the Labour Court with additional remedial powers to grant increased compensation. There is no legal basis to extend the scope of section 187(1) of the LRA by adding additional kinds of employer conduct not contemplated by the legislature when enacting the LRA, especially where it has provided adequate redress elsewhere.” [para 23]

While the finding of the LAC in DBT Technologies is currently binding, it is concerning that the dismissal of employees for their actions in lodging a grievance at their workplace is not elevated to the special category of protections offered by s 187 of the LRA, where a causal link is established between the dismissal and the grievance. As noted by the Labour Court in De Klerk v Cape Union Mart International (Pty) Ltd (C 620/2011) [2012] ZALCCT 22 it seems to be anomalous that “a whistle blower enjoy special protection in terms of s 187(1)(h), but not an employee who lodges a grievance in terms of her own employer's procedures...” [para 35]

Until next time,

Tamara Cohen



End of Document