



Law to give informants more protection
IR - News Watch

Law to give informants more protection

Reported on: 16 May 2000

Whistle­Blowers exposing corruption in the public and private sectors will get greater protection under new legislation that is likely to be passed in Parliament today. 

The Protected Disclosures Bill seeks to provide protection for employees who disclose "information regarding unlawful or irregular conduct by their employers or other employees" in government bodies or privately owned companies. 

Disclosures can be made on the following grounds: suspected criminal offences, failure to follow legal procedures, miscarriage of justice, health and safety issues, suspected environmental damage and unfair discrimination as spelt out in the recently promulgated Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act. 

Employees can make "protected disclosures" to a legal adviser; Cabinet member or provincial executive council member; the public protector; auditor-general or the person's employer. 

This Bill was originally part of the Open Democracy Bill that gives effect to an individual's Constitutional "right of access" to any information held by the state; to provide people with access to personal information held by private bodies and to provide for the correction of personal information held by state or private bodies". 

However, it was removed from the Open Democracy Bill because it would have made the legislation too lengthy and unmanageable. 

The Protected Disclosures Bill is an attempt by legislators to give effect to the principles of good governance enshrined in the national Constitution. 

At present neither South African common or statutory law allows for the protection for those who blow the whistle on corruption. 

According to the Bill's preamble, the legislation will allow whistle-blowers to release information without "fear of reprisals". The Bill's preamble goes on to say that "criminal and other irregular conducts in organs of state and private bodies are detrimental to good, effective, accountable and transparent governance". 

Corrupt activities could "endanger the economic stability of the Republic and have the potential to cause social damage". The aim of the legislation is to "create a culture which will facilitate the disclosure of information" in the public and private sectors. 

In addition, the Minister of Justice will be required to draw up comprehensive statutory guidelines for such disclosures. 

SOWETAN 

Wagheid Misbach 



End of Document