



All will be revealed about workplace crime
IR - News Watch

All will be revealed about workplace crime

Reported on: 02 October 2000

The Protected Disclosures Act, 26 of 2000, or, as it is more commonly called, the Whistleblowers Act, which was recently enacted as a statute, could be a powerful tool in the Government's efforts to fight workplace­related crime. 

The Act, for the first time, allows employees to "blow the whistle" or to disclose information relating to corruption, maladministration, and other improper conduct at the workplace, in public and private bodies without fear of reprisal. 

Further, every employer and employee is now regarded in terms of the provisions of the Act, as having a responsibility to address crime and other irregular conduct in the workplace. The employer must take all necessary steps to ensure that employees who disclose such information are protected from reprisals as a result of having made such disclosures. 

The Act represents a significant shift in Government policy as previously there was no specific provision in either South African common law or statutory law to protect "whistleblowing employees". 

The purpose of the Act is to create a culture in which employees will disclose information of criminal and other irregular conduct in the workplace in a responsible manner and generally promote the eradication of crime and misconduct in organs of state and private bodies. 

Section 3 of the Act provides that "no employee may be subjected to any occupational detriment by his or her employer on account, or partly on account, of having made a protected disclosure." 

The Act defines occupational detriment widely, including disciplinary action, dismissal, suspension, demotion, harassment, intimidation, being transferred against his or her will, being refused transfer or promotion, refusal of a reference, or being provided with an adverse reference, or in any way being adversely affected in respect of his or her employment, profession or office. 

A protected disclosure as defined in the Act means a disclosure made to a legal adviser, an employer, a member of the cabinet or of the executive council of a province, the Public Protector, the Auditor General, a person or body prescribed for the purposes of the Act, and ultimately (subject to certain requirements) the media or Parliament. 

The type of information disclosed may be, among others, a criminal offence, failure to comply with a legal obligation, a miscarriage of justice, endangerment to the health and safety of an individual, damage to the environment, unfair discrimination or deliberate concealment of any of the above. 

The Act is confined to the relationship between employer and employee in both public and private spheres. It would not provide protection to an independent contractor, for example. 

However, those whistleblowers who intend using the provisions of the Act to conceal their own involvement in criminal activities will not find refuge in this legislation. Where a law has been contravened, the Act will not protect employees from criminal prosecution, civil liability to third parties, or prosecution for offences, as the case may be. 

However, an employee may approach the Labour Court or any other court having jurisdiction (which would include the High Court), or may pursue. any other process allowed or prescribed by any law, including the common law, in order to protect him or her from suffering any occupational detriment. 

THE SOWETAN 

Nick Robb 



End of Document