



Protection for informers on the cards
IR - News Watch

Protection for informers on the cards

Reported on: 29 October 1999

Protection for workplace informers from harassment by fraudsters has been identified as a key requirement in the fight against corruption and fraud. 

One way of doing this was to hasten the passing of the Open Democracy Bill, which made some provisions for the protection of whistle­blowers, said Ms Lala Camerer of the Institute for Security Studies. 

The need for the protection of whistle­blowers also featured at the recent National Anti­Corruption Summit held in Cape Town, where Public Protector Mr Selby Baqwa called for this provision. 

Whistle­blowing is the disclosure by an employee of confidential information relating to some danger, fraud or other illegal or unethical conduct connected with the work­place. 

However, Camerer warned this practice could be risky as it could lead to a whistle­blower being victimised or losing his or her job. 

She referred to the case of Mr Billy Cobbett, former director general of housing, who raised concerns about suspicious tender procedures and General Bantu Holomisa, who exposed an alleged bribe to Mrs Stella Sigcau in former Transkei. Both lost their jobs. 

"The idea behind empowering ethical individuals through legislative protection to blow the whistle is that they are usually the first to realise that something may be seriously wrong in an organisation," said Camerer. 

"As such, organisations should create clear procedures and channels of communication so employees are able to disclose illegal or unethical practices without fear." 

Because of the risk involved in whistle­blowing, those active in the fight against corruption and fraud have called for the development and implementation of whistle­blowing mechanisms. 

These, they say should include measures to protect persons from victimisation where they expose corrupt and unethical practices. 

Spokeswoman for the KwaZulu-Natal Anti­Fraud and Corruption Campaign Ms Narina Riskowitz concedes that "intimidation" is a real problem in their fight. 

"Within an office environment we try to provide channels that will allow people to report without exposing themselves. Our anti-fraud hotline provides an avenue where people can report independently from line management." 

Camerer said the proposed whistle­blowing legislation fell under the Open Democracy Bill, which made provision for the transparency of Government actions and access to Government records. 

However, this Bill, which has not yet been passed, covers only the public sector. Calls have been made to extend it to apply to the private sector as well. 

The planned law will encourage people to report malpractices by providing protection should the whistle­blowers, whatever their motives, suffer from reprisals such as dismissal or demotions because of their actions. 

Camerer observed that, because of the need for fairness for officials accused of wrong­doing who will have a right to know of the accusations and an opportunity to defend themselves ­ anonymity for the whistle­blower would often be impossible. 

However in such instances the proposed legislation noted other protections for whistle­blowers. 

The Daily News 

Sipho Khumalo 



End of Document