



'Gauteng's corruption mole on Leon's payroll'
IR - News Watch

'Gauteng's corruption mole on Leon's payroll'

Reported on: 12 January 1999

Allegations of fraud, maladministration and corruption in Premier Mathole Motshekga's office were leaked to the media by someone on the Democratic Party Gauteng leader Mr Peter Leon's payroll. Director-general Mr Lulamile Mbete said yesterday. 

Mbete told a media conference that it was possible that the allegations could have been written by Leon. 

Responding to a claim that the DP had in its possession damning and sensitive information regarding corruption in Motshekga's office, Mbete said: "The document that contains this sensitive information is not what we would classify as whistle blowing. 

"Our view is that this is actually a report written possibly by someone in our office who must be on the payroll of the Democratic Party to pass on information which he can use to attack the premier of Gauteng." 

However, Leon dismissed the claims by Mbete as "nonsensical". He said the claims were both defamatory and untrue. 

"In fact, I will continue to give information on corruption to the Heath Commission," Leon said. 

Mbete said: "whistleblowers do not use pidgin English" to report cases. 

"They have no reason to disguise who they are if indeed they are serious about what they are reporting," he said. 

Mbete said Motshekga's office had already acted by dismissing an employee who was involved in fraudulent activity involving R30 000. 

"I immediately ordered an investigation which proved that the whistle blower was correct. We proceeded with suspension and subsequent dismissal," Mbete said. 

The claim by the document that the administration was keeping "drunks" in its employ was unjustified. Mbete said it was true that two of their employees had a drinking problem, but the pair was receiving help. 

"The employment code of the public service expects us to assist our staff. In any event, we all know that the abuse of alcohol is declared a sickness in South Africa. It is only humane to assist people who experience problems of this nature," he said. 

The document also seeks to discredit the premier's office by alluding to an incident in which a former employee ordered a junior staff member to falsify an invoice for the consumption of liquor amounting to R2 500 at a workshop organised by the province. 

"The former employee's misconduct was not the consumption of liquor, but the fraudulent attempt at changing the invoice. But he did the honourable thing by resigning before his case could be heard," Mbete said.

The Sowetan 

Joe Mdhlela and Ntombi Patrick 



End of Document