



Audit puts spotlight on alleged R4m fraud
IR - News Watch

Audit puts spotlight on alleged R4m fraud

Reported on: 21 May 2007

An internal audit has uncovered alleged corruption at the department of water affairs and forestry's Worcester office estimated at R4-million, including R400 000 spent on two golf carts and trailers.

A copy of the confidential audit report in the possession of the Cape Times shows senior officials may have contravened the department's procurement procedures and failed to comply with the Public Finance Management Act when they authorised the purchase of the golf carts, or tunnel vehicles, for R200 000 each.

The investigation was triggered by an anonymous call in 2005 to the department's hotline for reporting corruption.

The probe concluded that reasonable care had not been exercised when the vehicles had been bought. 

The vehicles were bought for routine inspections and maintenance at Bulshoek dam but could only be used once a year and were bought from SPEC Limited, which had a two-year R2m maintenance contract with the department. It was owned by Arnold Avanant, a former employee of the department. 

The audit recommended that Worcester area manager Thys Fourie and chief engineer Wally Kolmeyer, who were responsible for the purchase of the vehicles, be charged with misconduct and that the two vehicles be sold to recover the irregular expenditure.

But this was not done, according to the National Education, Health and Allied Workers' Union (Nehawu).

The trade union is involved in a tussle with the department after one of its members and former department employee, Raleigh Mpekula, was dismissed in the wake of the investigation.

Mpekula claims he was dismissed on trumped-up charges when officials in Worcester decided he was the whistleblower. 

Mpekula and Nehawu took the dispute to the General Public Services Sectoral Bargaining Council in a bid to have the department release a report of its 2002 investigation of the Worcester office. That probe was apparently ordered by former Water Affairs Minister Ronnie Kasrils. 

Despite being ordered to, the department had failed to release the report to Nehawu and Mpekula. 

Nehawu and Mpekula insist the whistleblower report is crucial to Mpekula's arbitration with the department as it alleged "gross misconduct involving senior managers in the Western Cape".

Mpekula wrote to current Water Affairs and Forestry Minister Lindiwe Hendricks that corruption at Bulshoekdam was being swept under the carpet.

Vusumuzi Ka Nzapheza

Iol.co.za



End of Document