



Home Affairs says disciplinary action taken against several employees flagged by whistleblower
IR - News Watch

                                                      Home Affairs says disciplinary action taken against several employees flagged by whistleblower                            

                                R                                eported                                 on:                                 3                                                                 November                                 20                                2                                5                  

                                            Kgomotso Modise                  

                                                      The Department of Home Affairs said it has taken disciplinary action against several of its employees who were flagged by whistleblower Mr T                                                      .                  

                                            702 Breakfast                                             recently sat down with the whistleblower who was named by former the Minister of Home Affairs, Aaron Motsoaledi, as someone who blew the lid on major corruption at the Marabastad Home Affairs office in Pretoria.                  

                                            Since his speaking out, Mr T has had two attempts on his life.                  

                                            While he has survived both assassination attempts, he lives in hiding, with four bullets still in his body.                  

                                            When Motsoaledi described Mr T during a press briefing on corruption at Tembisa Hospital, he likened him to Babita Deokaran, describing him as a diligent man who hates corruption.                  

                                            While Mr T put his life on the line to fight corruption, he said some officials implicated in the rot in the department have gotten off with a slap on the wrist.                  

                                            “Then I identified a guy. On that day, he was not at work. Then the following day, I called him to my office. Tell me what actually it transpired. I see here, you went on this, but somebody had worked on them. He immediately said, ‘well, you know, I have a problem with cash. I need to pay any cash’.”                  

                                            Mr T said because he pleaded guilty, the man was suspended for three months only to return to work, raising concern that he could possibly engage in corruption again.                  

                                            Home Affairs said a number of the cases reported by Mr T have been investigated and disciplinary action has been taken against implicated officials.                  

                                            EYEWITNESS NEWS                  



End of Document