



New tools to fix an ancient problem: the recent adoption of the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019
IR - Editorial

New tools to fix an ancient problem: the recent adoption of the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019

Women – and men – have long been the victims of violence and harassment in the context of work. Ancient texts are replete with references to abusive relationships, where victims are without power, and acts of violence and harassment largely go unseen and unpunished, even in the face of prohibitions, whether legal or moral, against violence and harassment. This is particularly so when the perpetrator is a person in a position of extraordinary power.

New developments are intended to disrupt this status quo; among these being the recent adoption of two new legal instruments including the ILO Convention concerning the Elimination of Violence and Harassment in the World of Work (cited as the Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019).

On Thursday 20th June, the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) published a provisional record containing two ILO instruments submitted to the Conference by the Standard-Setting Committee on Violence and Harassment in the World of Work, for adoption by the Conference.1 These two instruments, the ILO Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 and the Recommendation concerning the Elimination of Violence and Harassment in the World of Work, 2019, once implemented by member States,2 are likely to influence how employers approach and manage the various aspects of violence and harassment and its impact in the workplace.

Importantly, the Convention recognizes ‘the importance of a work culture based on mutual respect and dignity … to prevent violence and harassment’. The damage caused by violence and harassment runs deep: and among other things:

it ‘affects a person’s psychological, physical and s exual health, dignity, and family and social environment’

it ‘affects the quality of public and private services, and may prevent persons, particularly women, from accessing, and remaining and advancing in the labour market’; and

it ‘impacts negatively on the organization of work, workplace relations, worker engagement, enterprise reputation and productivity’3

The scope of the Convention is broad: it ‘applies to all sectors, whether private or public, both in the formal and informal economy, and whether in urban or rural areas’ and is intended to protect ‘workers and other persons in the world of work … irrespective of their contractual status [including] persons in training, … interns and apprentices, workers whose employment has been terminated, volunteers, jobseekers and job applicants and individuals exercising the authority, duties or responsibilities of an employer.’ It applies to violence and harassment,4 including gender-based violence5 and harassment, occurring, not only in the workplace, but also during work-related trips and events, communications, in employer-provided accommodation and when commuting to and from work.

While the Convention uses, and defines the term ‘violence and harassment’6 as a singular concept embracing a range of behaviours, it is not prescriptive that member States should do the same, leaving it open for member States to adopt laws and regulations that ‘may provide for a single concept or separate concepts.’7

The obligations on member States that ratify the Convention are to ‘respect, promote and realize the right of everyone to a world of work free from violence and harassment.’8 This requires member States to implement comprehensive policy and law including measures to:

prevent and combat violence and harassment

strengthen enforcement and monitoring

provide victims with access to remedies and support, and sanctions for perpetrators

raise awareness and develop tools for education and training.

ensure effective inspection and investigation of cases of violence and harassment, including inspection and investigation by the labour inspectorate and other bodies.

The burning question of course is: what exactly will all of this mean for the employer if the Convention is ratified by South Africa?

Article 9 of the Convention imposes a positive obligation on employers to take appropriate steps commensurate with their degree of control to prevent violence and harassment in the world of work. This requires employers, in consultation with workers and their representatives, to:

adopt and implement a workplace policy on violence and harassment

manage violence and harassment and the associated psychosocial risks in the context of occupational health and safety

identify the hazards and assess the risks of violence and harassment and take measures in prevent and control them; and to provide appropriate training in this regard.

Article 10 goes on to impose obligations in terms of enforcement and remedies, which has implications for employers too. More specifically, in addition to access to courts and tribunals, and complaint and investigation procedures, the Convention requires mechanisms for:

‘dispute resolution mechanisms at the workplace level,’ where this is appropriate, as well as ‘dispute resolution mechanisms external to the workplace’

‘protection against victimization of or retaliation against complainants, victims, witnesses and whistle-blowers’; and

‘legal, social, medical and administrative support measures for complainants and victims.’

More specifically, effective access should be provided to ‘gender-responsive, safe and effective complaint and dispute resolution mechanisms, support, service and remedies.’ Employers too should ‘recognize the effects of domestic violence and … mitigate its impact in the world of work.’

Importantly, while workers may ‘remove themselves from a work situation’ in circumstances where it is justified to do so, workers also have a duty to inform management. How this will play out in practice, and the mechanisms to support workers to do so, is likely to have a significant impact on whether or not the Convention is successful in combating violence and harassment.

On the whole, the Convention is certainly a welcome development and, if ratified by South Africa, will likely require amendment to the law. As our law currently stands, violence and harassment are treated primarily as concerns in the field of equality and anti-discrimination law, which is not necessarily a good fit for countering acts of violence and harassment, because of the ‘comparative’ nature of equality law and the elements consequently involved in proving an act of discrimination. Instead, the Convention, in Article 12, suggests, as one of the mechanisms for applying the Convention, that ‘existing occupational safety and health measures [be extended or adapted] to cover violence and harassment’ and that ‘specific measures’ be developed where necessary.

In this regard, the Convention brings clarity to the range of behaviour that is unacceptable in the workplace and finality to the long-standing debate about incidents of so-called ‘workplace bullying’ and whether or not South African law is adequately developed or should develop further to address the problem.

Although legal counter measures have, in the past, largely been ineffective against the scourge of violence and harassment, we live in the information age and in the age of empowerment, so perhaps then, there is reason to be optimistic about the developments.

Until next week,

Debbie Collier.



Footnotes
1	   Available online at http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_711242.pdf 
2	   The Convention enters into force 1 months following ratification by 2 member States. Member States that ratify the Convention are required to implement its provisions.
3	   Preamble to the Convention.
4	   In terms of the Convention, ‘“violence and harassment” in the world of work refers to a range of unacceptable behaviours and practices, or threats thereof, whether a single occurrence or repeated, that aim at, result in, or are likely to result in physical, psychological, s exual or economic harm, and includes gender-based violence and harassment’.
5	   This term, ie “gender-based violence and harassment,” ‘means violence and harassment directed at persons because of their s ex or gender, or affecting persons of a particular s ex or gender disproportionately, and includes s exual harassment’.
6	   See above.
7	   Article 1.2.
8	   Article 4.1. The Core Principles of the Convention are set out in Article 4.


End of Document