



Samwu march against Limpopo government
IR - News Watch

Samwu march against Limpopo government

Reported on: 31 March 2010

About 3 000 Samwu members marched to Limpopo Premier Cassel Mathale's office in Polokwane on Wednesday to protest against the "disappointing" management of municipalities in the province.

The South African Municipal Worker's Union (Samwu) provincial secretary, Alfred Sithole, said the union was disappointed with the manner in which municipalities in the province were managed.

"Our members in Limpopo are actively implementing the government's position on corruption (whistle blowing) but when we try to implement this position, we receive suspensions and bribes, in an attempt to divide us," he said.

Mathale was not available to receive the memorandum, but MEC for local government Soviet Lekganyane accepted it on his behalf. The union also marched to the South African Local Government Association's offices as well as those of the Capricorn Municipality. "He [Lekganyane] made some commitments," said Sithole.

"He said he would take the issues up with the municipalities and report back to Samwu in the beginning of April."

Sithole said Samwu planned a strike on April 12 should they not be satisfied with Lekganyane's feedback.

"We will review this when we receive his feedback, but we have made it clear that if we are not satisfied, all municipalities in Limpopo (23 in total) will embark on a provincial strike."

Sithole said Samwu demanded the reinstating of dismissed shopstewards, the stoppage of labour broking, and the outsourcing of and privatisation of municipal services and unfair labour practices by municipalities.

They also wanted all staff on temporary employment contracts to be employed permanently and demanded that all vacant posts in municipalities be filled.

Samwu also made more specific demands on certain municipalities in the province. It wanted the immediate removal of the municipal manager and mayor of Musina as well as the mayor of Sekhukhune, and said the Capricorn District Management must account for R163 million that went missing, among other things.

"As Samwu we are more than willing to co-operate with our municipalities and communities that have an interest in building a strong developmental local government," said Sithole. 

Sapa

Iol.co.za 



End of Document