



SARS warns business tax cheats
IR - News Watch

SARS warns business tax cheats

Reported on: 21 May 2004

Cape Town - The SA Revenue Service (Sars) yesterday issued a strong warning to business not to prop up profitability through tax-dodging schemes rather than improving its innovativeness and competitiveness.

Expanding on Sars's strategic plan for 2004 to 2007, spokesperson Sechaba Nkosi said it was determined to crack down on the increasingly sophisticated tax-dodging and smuggling schemes used by some firms that "have a remarkable ability to undermine the integrity of the tax base in any self-respecting country.

"We could go so far as to say South African businesses have become used to the idea that involuntary subsidisation of business profits through the fiscus is allowed, as opposed to gaining commercial advantage through your own innovative abilities and competitive edge 

"Business has grown too used to the idea that the fiscus is always available, because of weakness in legislation, weaknesses in administration or a lack of skills on our side, to give anyone an unfair advantage running into sometimes billions of rands at the expense of the state."

In his introductory remarks to the strategic plan, Pravin Gordhan, the Sars commissioner, indicated that a no-nonsense and tough but more user-friendly approach to tax collection remained a top priority, to help raise the funds needed to help the government implement its development plans.

This included the increased use of "third-party sources" to validate tax returns and reduce non-compliance; better and more accessible services; simpler tax return forms and an education programme about obligations.

In his report, Gordhan indicated that Sars would continue to crack down on smuggling by organised crime syndicates. 

Nkosi said Sars took "any violation of both the Income Act and Customs and Excise Duties Act very seriously and we have gone after people who have been implicated vigorously".

Sars last year managed to collect an extra R2.5 billion in taxes and although this was "impressive in absolute terms, in some cases this still only represents a single-digit effective tax rate".

Asked whether the increased use of third-party sources implied an attempt to encourage whistle-blowing, Nkosi replied: "While third-party information from those who believe that everyone should pay their fair share of tax is welcomed by Sars, it is not the focus of this initiative. 

"Third-party information would be information on income and/or deductions from employers, banks, etcetera."

Asked about progress in getting the informal sector to pay tax, Nkosi said that some might fall under the taxable thresholds.

"Where these thresholds are exceeded, Sars will use a combination of education, more user-friendly service offerings and, if necessary, enforcement action to ensure that the right amount of tax is paid," Nkosi said.

"Around 2002 we pointed out that although the informal sector leads in the number of non-compliant individuals, the formal sector leads by far with respect to the value of non-compliance."

Nkosi said the proposed taxpayers' charter to map out shared responsibilities and rights was still "under discussion in various quarters". 

Surveys on its content were being conducted.

The Business Report

Lynda Loxton



End of Document