



Workers take businesses to the cleaners
IR - News Watch

Workers take businesses to the cleaners

Reported on: 20 October 1999

Almost nine out of ten companies in a recent study expect to fall victim to fraud ­ most of it perpetrated by their employees. 

They have good reason: 83% report some experience of fraud in the past 12 months ­ up 17% from the number in the equivalent survey three years ago. 

The research involved more than 2000 firms in Southern Africa and was done by forensic and investigative auditors KPMG. 

Their report reveals cases of internal fraud have increased by almost half in the past four years; by comparison, overall fraud has risen by only 17% in the period. 

"A company's biggest enemy is not its management, clients, service­providers or suppliers, but its employees," said Mr Petrus Marais, managing principal of KPMG's forensic and investigative accounting group. 

But while they are the prime suspects, he said at a presentation yesterday of the survey findings, workers often played the deciding role in the fight against fraud. 

"The profile of the typical dishonest employee is clear. It is an employee who is not considered management, who is feeling the brunt of economic pressure and will collude with third parties to rid a company of money or monetary assets," said Marais. 

About three­quarters of firms surveyed said they recognised early warning signals of fraud in employees living beyond their means, staff who avoided taking leave, and those who often acted as the only staff dealing with suppliers. 

Companies were finding stringent internal controls the best deterrent to internal fraud. With "whistle blowers" among the staff, tighter controls accounted for more than half of all fraud uncovered. 

Other anti­fraud measures included codes of conduct and ethics programmes. 

"The lack of adequate penalties and enforcement, the inefficiencies of the justice system and the weakening of society's values continue to create an environment where it is easy to commit fraud," said Marais. 

However, South Africa was not alone and similar studies by his firm in Canada and the United States had revealed the same trends. 

"One of the good news stories to come out of the survey is that some 60% of responding companies believe the Government is committed to combating fraud. 

"Remarkably, the American survey shows that only 10% of Americans believe in their government's commitment," Marais noted. 

The local survey also revealed a 35% increase in the number of companies reporting crime in the past year compared with figures from five years ago. 

The Daily News 

Des Parker 



End of Document