



Chapter 4 Principles of Disclosure
King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance


King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King II: Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa - 2002  >  Section 6 - Compliance and Enforcement

Chapter 4
Principles of Disclosure
 1. Regulation by adoption of the philosophy of disclosure has a number of beneficial effects.
 2. In the first place, disclosure has a shrinking effect. When certain conduct, including the receipt of benefits, is required to be disclosed it often has the effect of deterring the adoption of any such conduct or the receipt of any such benefit. In this sense it deters the incidence of malpractice and excessive executive rewards.50
 3. The second benefit of disclosure is that it highlights misconduct and non-performance, thereby enabling the victims of delinquent misconduct to be aware of the delinquency so that appropriate remedial action can be taken.  In the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) was formed to create public disclosure and enforcement mechanisms to protect investors and promote the dissemination of reliable corporate information in the marketplace. The SEC regulates and promulgates rules governing shareowner resolutions.
 4. The benefits of disclosure were well summarised by Justice Louis Brandeis in Other People’s Money (1916) where the learned Judge states “Sunlight is justly commended as the best disinfectant, electric light as the best policeman”. Stanford Law School has set up the Stanford Clearinghouse that assist investors, the judiciary, policymakers, and the media in regard to class action litigation.  Based on the statement by Justice Brandeis, the website51 established by the school states that “if there are problems with the incidence of securities fraud, or with the conduct of class action litigation, the “sunlight” provided by this Internet disclosure facility may prove beneficial for all involved.”52 The project also depends on the SEC providing information dissemination services. 
 5. Increased disclosure levels should be encouraged in South Africa. The JSE listings rules now provide for the disclosure of directors’ emoluments beyond that required by the Companies Act.  Other regulators should be encouraged to increase disclosure levels to an extent greater than required by the statutes.
 6. Regulatory bodies, like the JSE and Financial Services Board (“FSB”), should be encouraged to enforce the strictest of sanctions on companies to avoid the laissez faire attitude that has crept into society with regard to law enforcement (which attitude extends to commercial law and regulations).53 Regulatory bodies are responsible for ensuring that delinquent directors are dealt with more severely.
 7. All boards should apply their minds to any incidents of misconduct by directors, and should censure guilty directors.  In addition, boards should report their findings and actions to shareowners.
 8. Transparency should be increased by private companies disclosing financial information. Standards of governance should protect all stakeholders, and private companies should be obliged to disclose financial information.  Where people transact with the public, there is a duty to exercise good governance.  In the context of a limited liability entity, disclosure is essential.  The exemption available to private companies whereby they do not have to file their financial information with the Registrar of Companies should be removed.54 Only once proper information is freely available will parties be able to seek the necessary protection for themselves.
 9. Recent legislation, that has been passed, will hopefully assist with the disclosure recommendations.55
10. It is essential that a culture of compliance be created, as this will lead to cost-effective regulation with minimum interference from authorities.  Self-regulation and enforcement through alternative mechanisms will only be possible if a culture of compliance is created.
11. Disclosure is a salutary regulatory requirement both in those cases where there is an existing legal remedy as well as in those cases where there is not an existing legal remedy.


Footnotes
50	   UK: The Combined Code led to the changes in the listings requirements and the obligatory disclosure of detailed individual directors’ emoluments.
51	   http://securities.stanford.research.html
52	   In the United States, the District Court for the Northern District of California approved Local Rule 23-2, the first local rule of Court in the US that requires Internet posting of major securities fraud class action litigation filings.
53	   The continued listing of a company on the JSE is effectively dependent on a company complying with its continuing obligations.  A company is required to provide a certificate on an annual basis indicating its compliance.  Where there is non-compliance with any listings requirements, the JSE Listings Committee may censure an issuer or suspend or terminate a listing.  The censure can be private or public and it may impose a penalty.  Further, if it finds that the contravention is due to a failure by all or any of the issuer’s directors to discharge their responsibilities under the Listings Requirements, it may censure the relevant director and publish such censure.  In the case of wilful or persistent misrepresentation and or refusal by a director to discharge his responsibilities following such censure, the Committee may state publicly that retaining the office is prejudicial to the interest of investors and if the director remains in office thereafter, the Committee may suspend or terminate the listing of the issuer’s securities.  The Committee is urged to use these provisions.
54	   See section 302 of the Companies Act.
55	   e.g. The Protected Disclosures Act (No. 26 of 2000) which introduced a statutory framework that enables employees to report inter alia unlawful conduct by employers and fellow employees (“Whistleblowing”); Section 7 of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act 121 of 1998 requires every employee of the business to report to the relevant authorities every transaction which s/he suspects may bring proceeds of crime into the possession of the business or which will facilitate the transfer of such proceeds.  This duty overrides in general any duty of confidentiality to the client.


End of Document
Chapter 4 Principles of Disclosure
Page 2 of 2


