



King IV Code on Corporate Governance
King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance


King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King IV: Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa - 2016  >  Part 5

King IV Code on Corporate Governance

PART 5.1: LEADERSHIP, ETHICS AND CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP

Leadership

Principle 1:

The governing body should lead ethically and effectively.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 1. Members of the governing body should individually and collectively cultivate the following characteristics and exhibit them in their conduct:
 2. Integrity:
 i. Members of the governing body must act in good faith and in the best interests of the organisation.
ii. Members of the governing body should avoid conflicts of interest. In cases where a conflict cannot be avoided, it should be disclosed to the governing body in full at the earliest opportunity, and then proactively managed as determined by the governing body and subject to legal provisions.
iii. Members of the governing body should act ethically beyond mere legal compliance.
iv. Members of the governing body should set the tone for an ethical organisational culture.
 3. Competence:
 i. Members of the governing body should take steps to ensure that they have sufficient working knowledge of the organisation, its industry, the triple context in which it operates, the capitals it uses and affects as well as of the key laws, rules, codes and standards applicable to the organisation.
ii. Members of the governing body must act with due care, skill and diligence, and take reasonably diligent steps to become informed about matters for decision.
iii. Members of the governing body should continuously develop their competence to lead effectively.
 4. Responsibility:
 i. Members of the governing body should assume collective responsibility for steering and setting the direction of the organisation; approving policy and planning; overseeing and monitoring of implementation and execution by management; and ensuring accountability for organisational performance.
ii. Members of the governing body should exercise courage in taking risks and capturing opportunities, but do so in a responsible manner and in the best interests of the organisation.
iii. Members of the governing body should take responsibility for anticipating, preventing or otherwise ameliorating the negative outcomes of the organisation’s activities and outputs on the triple context in which it operates, and the capitals that it uses and affects.
iv. Members of the governing body should attend meetings of the governing body and its committees, and devote sufficient time and effort to prepare for those meetings.
 5. Accountability:

      Members of the governing body should be willing to answer for the execution of their responsibilities, even when these were delegated.
 e. Fairness:
 i. Members of the governing body should adopt a stakeholder-inclusive approach in the execution of their governance role and responsibilities.
ii. Members of the governing body should direct the organisation in such a way that it does not adversely affect the natural environment, society or future generations.
 f. Transparency:

      Members of the governing body should be transparent in the manner in which they exercise their governance role and responsibilities.
 2. The governing body should embody the above ethical characteristics in order to offer effective leadership that results in achieving strategic objectives and positive outcomes over time.
 3. The arrangements by which the members of the governing body are being held to account for ethical and effective leadership should be disclosed. These arrangements would include, but are not limited to, codes of conduct and performance evaluations of the governing body and its members.

Organisational ethics

Principle 2:The governing body should govern the ethics of the organisation in a way that supports the establishment of an ethical culture.
  
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 4. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of ethics by setting the direction for how ethics should be approached and addressed by the organisation.
 5. The governing body should approve codes of conduct and ethics policies that articulate and give effect to its direction on organisational ethics.
 6. The governing body should ensure that codes of conduct and ethics policies:
 7. encompass the organisation’s interaction with both internal and external stakeholders and the broader society; and
 8. address the key ethical risks of the organisation.
 7. The governing body should ensure that the codes of conduct and ethics policies provide for arrangements that familiarise employees and other stakeholders with the organisation’s ethical standards. These arrangements should include:
 8. publishing the organisation’s codes of conduct and policies on the organisation’s website, or on other platforms or through other media as is appropriate;
 9. the incorporation by reference, or otherwise, of the relevant codes of conduct and policies in supplier and employee contracts; and
 10. including the codes of conduct and ethics policies in employee induction and training programmes.
 8. The governing body should delegate to management the responsibility for implementation and execution of the codes of conduct and ethics policies.
 9. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of the management of ethics and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
 10. Application of the organisation’s ethical standards to the processes for the recruitment, evaluation of performance and reward of employees, as well as the sourcing of suppliers.
 11. Having sanctions and remedies in place for when the organisation’s ethical standards are breached.
 12. The use of protected disclosure or whistle-blowing mechanisms to detect breaches of ethical standards and dealing with such disclosures appropriately.
 13. The monitoring of adherence to the organisation’s ethical standards by employees and other stakeholders through, among others, periodic independent assessments.
10. The following should be disclosed in relation to organisational ethics:
a. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing ethics.
b. Key areas of focus during the reporting period.
c. Measures taken to monitor organisational ethics and how the outcomes were addressed.
d. Planned areas of future focus.

Responsible corporate citizenship

Principle 3:

The governing body should ensure that the organisation is and is seen to be a responsible corporate citizen.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
11. The governing body should assume responsibility for corporate citizenship by setting the direction for how it should be approached and addressed by the organisation.
12. The governing body should ensure that the organisation’s responsible corporate citizenship efforts include compliance with the Constitution of South Africa (including the Bill of Rights), the law, leading standards, and adherence to its own codes of conduct and policies.
13. The governing body should oversee that the organisation’s core purpose and values, strategy and conduct are congruent with it being a responsible corporate citizen.
14. The governing body should oversee and monitor, on an ongoing basis, how the consequences of the organisation’s activities and outputs affect its status as a responsible corporate citizen. This oversight and monitoring should be performed against measures and targets agreed with management in all of the following areas:
a. Workplace (including employment equity; fair remuneration; and the safety, health, dignity and development of employees).
b. Economy (including economic transformation; prevention, detection and response to fraud and corruption; and responsible and transparent tax policy).
c. Society (including public health and safety; consumer protection; community development; and protection of human rights).
d. Environment (including responsibilities in respect of pollution and waste disposal; and protection of biodiversity).
15. The following should be disclosed in relation to corporate citizenship:
a. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing responsible corporate citizenship.
b. Key areas of focus during the reporting period.
c. Measures taken to monitor corporate citizenship and how the outcomes were addressed.
d. Planned areas of future focus.

PART 5.2: STRATEGY, PERFORMANCE AND REPORTING

Strategy and performance

Principle 4:

The governing body should appreciate that the organisation’s core purpose, its risks and opportunities, strategy, business model, performance and sustainable development are all inseparable elements of the value creation process.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 1. The governing body should assume responsibility for organisational performance by steering and setting the direction for the realisation of the organisation’s core purpose and values through its strategy.
 2. The governing body should delegate to management the formulation and development of the organisation’s short, medium and long-term strategy.
 3. The organisation’s short, medium and long-term strategy as formulated and developed by management should be approved by the governing body. When considering the proposed strategy for approval, the governing body should challenge it constructively with reference to, among others, the following:
 4. The timelines and parameters which determine the meaning of short, medium and long term respectively.
 5. The risks, opportunities and other significant matters connected to the triple context in which the organisation operates.
 6. The extent to which the proposed strategy depends on the resources and relationships connected to the various forms of capital.
 7. The legitimate and reasonable needs, interests and expectations of material stakeholders.
 8. The increase, decrease or transformation of the various forms of capitals that may result from the execution of the proposed strategy.
 9. The interconnectivity and inter-dependence of all of the above.
 4. The governing body should ensure that it approves the policies and operational plans developed by management to give effect to the approved strategy. These should include the key performance measures and targets for assessing the achievement of strategic objectives and positive outcomes over the short, medium and long term.
 5. The governing body should delegate to management the responsibility to implement and execute the approved policies and operational plans.
 6. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of the implementation of strategy and operational plans by management against agreed performance measures and targets.
 7. The governing body should oversee that the organisation continually assesses, and responsibly responds to, the negative consequences of its activities and outputs on the triple context in which it operates, and the capitals which it uses and affects.
 8. As part of its oversight of performance, the governing body should be alert to the general viability of the organisation with regard to its reliance and effects on the capitals, its solvency and liquidity, and its status as a going concern.

In respect of disclosure on strategy and performance, refer to Reporting below.

Reporting

Principle 5:

The governing body should ensure that reports issued by the organisation enable stakeholders to make informed assessments of the organisation’s performance, and its short, medium and long-term prospects.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 9. The governing body should assume responsibility for the organisation’s reporting by setting the direction for how it should be approached and conducted.
10. The governing body should approve management’s determination of the reporting frameworks (including reporting standards) to be used, taking into account legal requirements and the intended audience and purpose of each report.
11. The governing body should oversee that reports such as the annual financial statements, sustainability reports, social and ethics committee reports, or other online or printed information or reports are issued, as is necessary, to comply with legal requirements, and/or to meet the legitimate and reasonable information needs of material stakeholders.
12. The governing body should oversee that the organisation issues an integrated report at least annually, which is either:
a. a standalone report which connects the more detailed information in other reports and addresses, at a high level and in a complete, concise way, the matters that could significantly affect the organisation’s ability to create value; or
b. a distinguishable, prominent and accessible part of another report which also includes the annual financial statements and other reports that must be issued in compliance with legal provisions.
13. The governing body should approve management’s bases for determining materiality for the purpose of deciding which information should be included in external reports.
14. The governing body should ensure the integrity of external reports as provided for in Part 5.4, Assurance of External Reports.
15. The governing body should oversee that the following information is published on the organisation’s website, or on other platforms or through other media as is appropriate for access by stakeholders:
a. Corporate governance disclosures required in terms of this Code (refer to Part 3: King IV Application and Disclosure for more detail).
b. Integrated reports.
c. Annual financial statements and other external reports.

PART 5.3: GOVERNING STRUCTURES AND DELEGATION

Primary role and responsibilities of the governing body

Principle 6:

The governing body should serve as the focal point and custodian of corporate governance in the organisation.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 1. The governing body should exercise its leadership role by:
 2. steering the organisation and setting its strategic direction;
 3. approving policy and planning that give effect to the direction provided;
 4. overseeing and monitoring of implementation and execution by management; and
 5. ensuring accountability for organisational performance by means of, among others, reporting and disclosure.
 2. The governing body should ensure that its role, responsibilities, membership requirements and procedural conduct are documented in a charter which it regularly reviews to guide its effective functioning.
 3. The governing body should approve the protocol to be followed in the event that it or any of its members or committees need to obtain independent, external professional advice at the cost of the organisation on matters within the scope of their duties.
 4. The governing body should approve the protocol to be followed by its non-executive members for requisitioning documentation from, and setting up meetings with, management.
 5. The following should be disclosed in relation to the primary role and responsibilities of the governing body:
 6. The number of meetings held during the reporting period, and attendance at those meetings.
 7. Whether the governing body is satisfied that it has fulfilled its responsibilities in accordance with its charter for the reporting period.

Composition of the governing body

Principle 7:

The governing body should comprise the appropriate balance of knowledge, skills, experience, diversity and independence for it to discharge its governance role and responsibilities objectively and effectively.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Composition
 6. The governing body should assume responsibility for its composition by setting the direction and approving the processes for it to attain the appropriate balance of knowledge, skills, experience, diversity and independence to objectively and effectively discharge its governance role and responsibilities.
 7. When determining the requisite number of members of the governing body, the following factors should be considered:
 8. The appropriate mix of knowledge, skills and experience, including the business, commercial and industry experience, needed to govern the organisation.
 9. The appropriate mix of executive, non-executive and independent non-executive members.
 10. The need for a sufficient number of members that qualify to serve on the committees of the governing body.
 11. The need to secure a quorum at meetings.
 12. Regulatory requirements.
 13. Diversity targets relating to the composition of the governing body.
 8. The governing body should comprise a majority of non-executive members, most of whom should be independent.
 9. As a minimum, the chief executive officer (CEO) and at least one other executive should be appointed to the governing body to ensure that it has more than one point of direct interaction with management. The executive other than the CEO appointed to the governing body may be the chief finance officer (CFO) or another designated executive as is appropriate for the organisation.
10. The governing body should promote diversity in its membership across a variety of attributes relevant for promoting better decision-making and effective governance, including field of knowledge, skills and experience as well as age, culture, race and gender.
11. The governing body should set targets for race and gender representation in its membership.
12. The governing body should establish arrangements for periodic, staggered rotation of its members so as to invigorate its capabilities by introducing members with new expertise and perspectives while retaining valuable knowledge, skills and experience and maintaining continuity.
13. The governing body should establish a succession plan for its membership which should include the identification, mentorship and development of future candidates.

Nomination, election and appointment of members to the governing body
14. The nomination of candidates for election as members of the governing body should be approved by the governing body as a whole.
15. The processes for nomination, election and ultimately, the appointment of members to the governing body should be formal and transparent.
16. Before nominating a candidate for election, the governing body should consider the following:
a. The collective knowledge, skills and experience required by the governing body.
b. The diversity of the governing body.
c. Whether the candidate meets the appropriate fit and proper criteria.
17. Nomination for re-election of an incumbent of the governing body should be considered by the governing body on the basis of that member’s performance, including attendance at meetings of the governing body and its committees.
18. A candidate for election as a non-executive member of the governing body should be requested to provide the governing body with details of professional commitments and a statement that confirms that the candidate has sufficient time available to fulfil the responsibilities as member of the governing body.
19. Prior to their nomination for election, candidates’ backgrounds should be independently investigated, and their qualifications should be independently verified.
20. A brief professional profile of each candidate standing for election at the annual general meeting (AGM), including details of existing professional commitments, should accompany the notice of the AGM, together with a statement from the governing body confirming whether it supports the candidate’s election or re-election.
21. Upon election, the terms and conditions for serving as a member of the governing body should be formalised in a letter of appointment.
22. The governing body should ensure that incoming members are inducted to enable them to make the maximum contribution within the shortest time possible.
23. Members of the governing body with no or limited governance experience should be provided with mentorship and encouraged to undergo training.
24. A programme of professional development and regular briefings on legal and corporate governance developments, and risks and changes in the external environment of the organisation, should be provided for members of the governing body.

Independence and conflicts
25. Subject to legal provisions, each member of the governing body should submit to the governing body a declaration of all financial, economic and other interests held by the member and related parties at least annually, or whenever there are significant changes.
26. At the beginning of each meeting of the governing body or its committees, all members should be required to declare whether any of them has any conflict of interest in respect of a matter on the agenda. Any such conflicts should be proactively managed as determined by the governing body and subject to legal provisions.
27. Non-executive members of the governing body may be categorised by the governing body as independent if it concludes that there is no interest, position, association or relationship which, when judged from the perspective of a reasonable and informed third party, is likely to influence unduly or cause bias in decision- making in the best interests of the organisation.
28. The governing body should consider the following and other indicators holistically, and on a substance-over- form basis, when assessing the independence of a member of the governing body for purposes of categorisation. The member of the governing body:
a. is a significant provider of financial capital, or ongoing funding to the organisation; or is an officer, employee or a representative of such provider of financial capital or funding;
b. if the organisation is a company, participates in a share-based incentive scheme offered by the company;
c. if the organisation is a company, owns securities in the company, the value of which is material to the personal wealth of the director;
d. has been in the employ of the organisation as an executive manager during the preceding three financial years, or is a related party to such executive manager;
e. has been the designated external auditor responsible for performing the statutory audit for the organisation, or a key member of the audit team of the external audit firm, during the preceding three financial years;
f. is a significant or ongoing professional adviser to the organisation, other than as a member of the governing body;
g. is a member of the governing body or the executive management of a significant customer of, or supplier to, the organisation;
h. is a member of the governing body or the executive management of another organisation which is a related party to the organisation; or
i. is entitled to remuneration contingent on the performance of the organisation.
29. A non-executive member of the governing body may continue to serve, in an independent capacity, for longer than nine years if, upon an assessment by the governing body conducted every year after nine years, it is concluded that the member exercises objective judgement and there is no interest, position, association or relationship which, when judged from the perspective of a reasonable and informed third party, is likely to influence unduly or cause bias in decision-making.
30. The following should be disclosed with regards to the composition of the governing body:
a. Whether the governing body is satisfied that its composition reflects the appropriate mix of knowledge, skills, experience, diversity and independence.
b. The targets set for gender and race representation in the membership of the governing body, and progress made against these targets.
c. The categorisation of each member as executive or non-executive.
d. The categorisation of each non-executive member as independent or not and, when a non-executive member of the governing body has been serving for longer than nine years, a summary of the views of the governing body on the independence of the member.
e. The qualifications and experience of members.
f. Each member’s period of service on the governing body.
g. The age of each member.
h. Other governing body and professional positions held by each member.
i. The reasons why any members of the governing body have been removed, resigned or retired.

Chair of the governing body
31. The governing body should elect an independent non-executive member as chair to lead the governing body in the objective and effective discharge of its governance role and responsibilities.
32. The governing body should appoint an independent non-executive member as the lead independent to fulfil the following functions:
a. To lead in the absence of the chair.
b. To serve as a sounding board for the chair.
c. To act as an intermediary between the chair and other members of the governing body, if necessary.
d. To deal with shareholders’ concerns where contact through the normal channels has failed to resolve concerns, or where such contact is inappropriate.
e. To strengthen independence on the governing body if the chair is not an independent non-executive member of the governing body.
f. To chair discussions and decision-making by the governing body on matters where the chair has a conflict of interest.
g. To lead the performance appraisal of the chair.
33. The chair’s role, responsibilities and term in office, as well as that of the lead independent, should be documented in the charter of the governing body or elsewhere.
34. The CEO of the organisation should not also chair the governing body, and the retired CEO should not become the chair of the governing body until three complete years have passed after the end of the CEO’s tenure.
35. In order to determine whether the chair is able to perform the duties of this office effectively, the chair, together with the governing body, should determine the number of outside professional positions that the chair is allowed to hold, taking into account the relative size and complexity of the organisations involved.
36. When determining which of its committees the chair of the governing body should serve on, either as member or chair, the governing body should consider how this affects the overall concentration and balance of power on the governing body. Generally, the following should apply:
a. The chair should not be a member of the audit committee.
b. The chair may be a member of the committee responsible for remuneration but should not be its chair.
c. The chair should be a member of the committee responsible for nominations of members of the governing body and may also be its chair.
d. The chair may be a member of the committee responsible for risk governance and may also be its chair.
e. The chair may be a member of the social and ethics committee but should not be its chair.
37. The governing body should ensure there is succession planning in place for the position of chair.
38. The following should be disclosed in relation to the chair:
a. Whether the chair is considered to be independent.
b. Whether or not an independent non-executive member of the governing body has been appointed as the lead independent, and the role and responsibilities assigned to the position.

Committees of the governing body

Principle 8:

The governing body should ensure that its arrangements for delegation within its own structures promote independent judgement, and assist with balance of power and the effective discharge of its duties.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

General
39. The governing body should determine if and when to delegate particular roles and responsibilities to an individual member or members of the governing body, or to standing or ad hoc-committees. The exercise of judgement by the governing body in this regard, is subject to legal requirements and should be guided by what is appropriate for the organisation and achieving the objectives of the delegation.
40. In the event that the governing body determines not to delegate all or some of the responsibilities dealt with in this Code as part of the responsibilities of a specific committee, the governing body should ensure that it fulfils those responsibilities itself.
41. Delegation to an individual member or members of the governing body should be recorded in writing and approved by the governing body. The record should set out the nature and extent of the responsibilities delegated, decision-making authority, the duration of the delegation, and the delegates’ reporting responsibilities.
42. Delegation to committees should be recorded by means of a formal terms of reference that should be approved and reviewed annually by the governing body.
43. The terms of reference should, at a minimum, deal with the following:
a. The composition of the committee and, if applicable, the process and criteria for the appointment of any committee members who are not members of the governing body.
b. The committee’s overall role and associated responsibilities and functions.
c. Delegated authority with respect to decision-making.
d. The tenure of the committee.
e. When and how the committee should report to the governing body and others.
f. The committee’s access to resources and information.
g. The meeting procedures to be followed.
h. The arrangements for evaluating the committee’s performance.
44. The governing body should consider the allocation of roles and associated responsibilities and the composition of membership across committees holistically, so as to achieve the following:
a. Effective collaboration through cross-membership between committees, where required; coordinated timing of meetings; and avoidance of duplication or fragmented functioning in so far as possible.
b. Where more than one committee has jurisdiction to deal with a similar matter, the specific role and positioning of each committee in relation to such matter are defined to ensure complementary rather than competing approaches.
c. A balanced distribution of power in respect of membership across committees, so that no individual has the ability to dominate decision-making, and no undue reliance is placed on any individual.
45. The governing body should ensure that each committee, as a whole, has the necessary knowledge, skills, experience and capacity to execute its duties effectively.
46. Each committee should have a minimum of three members subject to legal provisions, where applicable.
47. Members of the executive and senior management should be invited to attend committee meetings either by standing invitation or on an ad hoc-basis to provide pertinent information and insights in their areas of responsibility.
48. Every member of the governing body is entitled to attend any committee meeting as an observer. However, unless that member is also a member of the committee, the member is not entitled to participate without the consent of the chair; does not have a vote; and is not entitled to fees for such attendance, unless payment of fees is agreed to by the governing body and shareholders.
49. Any delegation by the governing body of its responsibilities to a committee or a member of the governing body member will not by or of itself constitute a discharge of the governing body’s accountability. The governing body should apply its collective mind to the information, opinions, recommendations, reports and statements presented by the committee or the member.
50. The following should be disclosed in relation to each committee of the governing body:
a. Its overall role and associated responsibilities and functions.
b. Its composition, including each member’s qualifications and experience.
c. Any external advisers or invitees who regularly attend committee meetings.
d. Key areas of focus during the reporting period.
e. The number of meetings held during the reporting period and attendance at those meetings.
f. Whether the committee is satisfied that it has fulfilled its responsibilities in accordance with its terms of reference for the reporting period.

Audit committee
51. The establishment of an audit committee is a statutory requirement for some organisations. As a matter of leading practice, the governing body of any organisation that issues audited financial statements should consider establishing an audit committee, the role of which should be to provide independent oversight of, among others:
a. the effectiveness of the organisation’s assurance functions and services, with particular focus on combined assurance arrangements, including external assurance service providers, internal audit and the finance function; and
b. the integrity of the annual financial statements and, to the extent delegated by the governing body, other external reports issued by the organisation.
52. A statutory audit committee has the power to make decisions regarding its statutory duties, and is accountable for its performance in this regard. In addition to its statutory duties, the governing body may delegate other responsibilities to the audit committee, such as the approval of the annual financial statements, but the governing body remains ultimately accountable for such delegated responsibilities.
53. If the governing body delegates risk governance to the audit committee, the audit committee should satisfy itself that it dedicates sufficient time to this responsibility.
54. Whether or not the governance of risk is delegated to the audit committee, the audit committee should oversee the management of financial and other risks that affect the integrity of external reports issued by the organisation.
55. The members of the audit committee should, as a whole, have the necessary financial literacy, skills and experience to execute their duties effectively.
56. All members of the audit committee should be independent, non-executive members of the governing body.
57. The governing body should appoint an independent, non-executive member to chair the audit committee.
58. The audit committee should meet annually with the internal and external auditors respectively, without management being present, to facilitate an exchange of views and concerns that may not be appropriate for discussion in an open forum.
59. In addition to required statutory disclosure and the disclosures recommended in paragraph 50, the following should also be disclosed in relation to the audit committee:
a. A statement as to whether the audit committee is satisfied that the external auditor is independent of the organisation. The statement should specifically address:
 i. the policy and controls that address the provision of non-audit services by the external auditor, and the nature and extent of such services rendered during the financial year;
ii. the tenure of the external audit firm and, in the event of the firm having been involved in a merger or acquisition, including the tenure of the predecessor firm;
iii. the rotation of the designated external audit partner; and
iv. significant changes in the management of the organisation during the external audit firm’s tenure which may mitigate the attendant risk of familiarity between the external auditor and management.
b. Significant matters that the audit committee has considered in relation to the annual financial statements, and how these were addressed by the committee.
c. The audit committee’s views on the quality of the external audit, with reference to audit quality indicators such as those that may be included in inspection reports issued by external audit regulators.
d. The audit committee’s views on the effectiveness of the chief audit executive and the arrangements for internal audit.
e. The audit committee’s views on the effectiveness of the design and implementation of internal financial controls, and on the nature and extent of any significant weaknesses in the design, implementation or execution of internal financial controls that resulted in material financial loss, fraud, corruption or error.
f. The audit committee’s views on the effectiveness of the CFO and the finance function.
g. The arrangements in place for combined assurance and the committee’s views on its effectiveness.

Committee responsible for nominations of members of the governing body
60. The governing body should consider allocating the oversight of the following to a dedicated committee, or adding it to the responsibilities of another committee as is appropriate for the organisation:
a. The process for nominating, electing and appointing members of the governing body.
b. Succession planning in respect of governing body members.
c. Evaluation of the performance of the governing body.
61. All members of the committee for nominations should be non-executive members of the governing body, and the majority should be independent.

Refer to paragraph 50 for the recommended disclosures in relation to the committee responsible for nominations.

Committee responsible for risk governance
62. The governing body should consider allocating the oversight of risk governance to a dedicated committee, or adding it to the responsibilities of another committee as is appropriate for the organisation.
63. If the committees for audit and risk are separate, the governing body should consider for one or more members to have joint membership of both committees for more effective functioning.
64. The committee for risk governance should have executive and non-executive members, with a majority being non-executive members of the governing body.

Refer to paragraph 50 for the recommended disclosures in relation to the committee responsible for risk.

Committee responsible for remuneration
65. The governing body should consider allocating oversight of remuneration to a dedicated committee, or adding it to the responsibilities of another committee as is appropriate for the organisation.
66. All members of the committee for remuneration should be non-executive members of the governing body, with the majority being independent non-executive members of the governing body.
67. The committee for remuneration should be chaired by an independent non-executive member.

Refer to paragraph 50 for the recommended disclosures in relation to the committee responsible for remuneration.

Social and ethics committee
68. For some companies, the establishment of a social and ethics committee is a statutory requirement. The governing body of any organisation not so obliged should consider allocating oversight of, and reporting on, organisational ethics, responsible corporate citizenship, sustainable development and stakeholder relationships to a dedicated committee, or adding it to the responsibilities of another committee as is appropriate for the organisation.
69. The responsibilities of the social and ethics committee should include its statutory duties (if applicable) and any other responsibilities delegated to it by the governing body.
70. The social and ethics committee should, subject to legal provisions, have executive and non-executive members, with a majority being non-executive members of the governing body.

Refer to paragraph 50 for the recommended disclosures in relation to the social and ethics committee.

Evaluations of the performance of the governing body

Principle 9: 
The governing body should ensure that the evaluation of its own performance and that of its committees, its chair and its individual members, support continued improvement in its performance and effectiveness.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
71. The governing body should assume responsibility for the evaluation of its own performance and that of its committees, its chair and its individual members by determining how it should be approached and conducted.
72. The governing body should appoint an independent non-executive member to lead the evaluation of the chair’s performance if a lead independent is not in place.
73. A formal process, either externally facilitated or not in accordance with methodology approved by the governing body, should be followed for evaluating the performance of the governing body, its committees, its chair and its individual members at least every two years.
74. Every alternate year, the governing body should schedule in its yearly work plan an opportunity for consideration, reflection and discussion of its performance and that of its committees, its chair and its members as a whole.
75. The following should be disclosed in relation to the evaluation of the performance of the governing body:
a. A description of the performance evaluations undertaken during the reporting period, including their scope, whether they were formal or informal, and whether they were externally facilitated or not.
b. An overview of the evaluation results and remedial actions taken.
c. Whether the governing body is satisfied that the evaluation process is improving its performance and effectiveness.

Appointment and delegation to management

Principle 10:
The governing body should ensure that the appointment of, and delegation to, management contribute to role clarity and the effective exercise of authority and responsibilities.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

CEO appointment and role
76. The governing body should appoint the CEO.
77. The CEO should be responsible for leading the implementation and execution of approved strategy, policy and operational planning, and should serve as the chief link between management and the governing body.
78. The CEO should be accountable, and report to, the governing body.
79. The CEO should not be a member of the remuneration, audit or nomination committees, but should attend by invitation any meeting, or part thereof, if needed to contribute pertinent insights and information.
80. The CEO and the governing body should agree on whether the CEO takes up additional professional positions, including membership of other governing bodies outside the organisation. Time constraints and potential conflicts of interest should be considered and balanced against the opportunity for professional development.
81. The governing body should satisfy itself that there is succession planning for the CEO position in place to provide continuity of executive leadership. Succession planning should be reviewed periodically, and should provide for both succession in emergency situations and succession over the longer term.
82. The governing body should formally evaluate the performance of the CEO against agreed performance measures and targets at least annually.
83. The following should be disclosed in relation to the CEO:
a. The notice period stipulated in the CEO’s employment contract and the contractual conditions related to termination.
b. Other professional commitments of the CEO, including membership of governing bodies outside the organisation.
c. Whether succession planning is in place for the CEO position.

Delegation
84. The governing body should set the direction and parameters for the powers which are to be reserved for itself, and those that are to be delegated to management via the CEO.
85. The governing body should approve a delegation of authority framework that articulates its set direction on reservation and delegation of power.
86. The governing body should ensure that the delegation of authority framework addresses the authority to appoint executives who will serve as ex officio-executive members of the governing body and to make other executive appointments.
87. The governing body should oversee that key management functions are:
a. headed by an individual with the necessary competence and authority, and
b. adequately resourced.
88. The governing body should satisfy itself that there is succession planning in place for executive management and other key positions to provide continuity of leadership. Succession planning should be reviewed periodically, and provide for both succession in emergency situations and succession over the longer term.
89. A statement by the governing body on whether it is satisfied that the delegation of authority framework contributes to role clarity and the effective exercise of authority and responsibilities should be disclosed.

Professional corporate governance services to the governing body
90. The governing body should ensure that it has access to professional and independent guidance on corporate governance and its legal duties, and also that it has support to coordinate the functioning of the governing body and its committees.
91. For some companies, the appointment of a company secretary is a statutory requirement. In respect of those companies, the company secretary provides professional corporate governance services. The governing body of an organisation not so obliged should, as a matter of leading practice, consider appointing a company secretary or other professional, as is appropriate for the organisation, to provide professional corporate governance services to the governing body.
92. The governing body should approve the arrangements for the provision of professional corporate governance services, including whether to outsource them to a juristic person, or to make a full-time or part-time appointment.
93. Regardless of the arrangements it has approved, the governing body should ensure that the office of the company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services, is empowered and that the position carries the necessary authority.
94. The governing body should approve the appointment, including the employment contract and remuneration of the company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services. The governing body should oversee that the person appointed has the necessary competence, gravitas and objectivity to provide independent guidance and support at the highest level of decision-making in the organisation.
95. The governing body should have primary responsibility for the removal of the company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services.
96. The company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services should have unfettered access to the governing body but, for reasons of independence, should maintain an arms-length relationship with it and its members; accordingly, the company secretary should not be a member of the governing body.
97. The company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services should report to the governing body via the chair on all statutory duties and functions performed in connection with the governing body. Regarding other duties and administrative matters, the company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services should report to the member of executive management designated for this purpose as is appropriate for the organisation.
98. The performance and independence of the company secretary or other professional providing corporate governance services should be evaluated at least annually by the governing body.
99. The arrangements in place for accessing professional corporate governance services and a statement on whether the governing body believes those arrangements are effective should be disclosed.

PART 5.4: GOVERNANCE FUNCTIONAL AREAS

Risk governance

Principle 11:

The governing body should govern risk in a way that supports the organisation in setting and achieving its strategic objectives.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
 1. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of risk by setting the direction for how risk should be approached and addressed in the organisation. Risk governance should encompass both:
 2. the opportunities and associated risks to be considered when developing strategy; and
 3. the potential positive and negative effects of the same risks on the achievement of organisational objectives.
 2. The governing body should treat risk as integral to the way it makes decisions and executes its duties.
 3. The governing body should approve policy that articulates and gives effect to its set direction on risk.
 4. The governing body should evaluate and agree the nature and extent of the risks that the organisation should be willing to take in pursuit of its strategic objectives. It should approve in particular:
 5. the organisation’s risk appetite, namely its propensity to take appropriate levels of risk; and
 6. the limit of the potential loss that the organisation has the capacity to tolerate.
 5. The governing body should delegate to management the responsibility to implement and execute effective risk management.
 6. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of risk management and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
 7. An assessment of risks and opportunities emanating from the triple context in which the organisation operates and the capitals that the organisation uses and affects.
 8. An assessment of the potential upside, or opportunity, presented by risks with potentially negative effects on achieving organisational objectives.
 9. An assessment of the organisation’s dependence on resources and relationships as represented by the various forms of capital.
 10. The design and implementation of appropriate risk responses.
 11. The establishment and implementation of business continuity arrangements that allow the organisation to operate under conditions of volatility, and to withstand and recover from acute shocks.
 12. The integration and embedding of risk management in the business activities and culture of the organisation.
 7. The governing body should consider the need to receive periodic independent assurance on the effectiveness of risk management.
 8. The nature and extent of the risks and opportunities the organisation is willing to take should be disclosed without compromising sensitive information.
 9. In addition, the following should be disclosed in relation to risk:
 10. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing risk.
 11. Key areas of focus during the reporting period, including objectives, the key risks that the organisation faces, as well as undue, unexpected or unusual risks and risks taken outside of risk tolerance levels.
 12. Actions taken to monitor the effectiveness of risk management and how the outcomes were addressed.
 13. Planned areas of future focus.

Technology and information governance

Principle 12:

The governing body should govern technology and information in a way that supports the organisation setting and achieving its strategic objectives.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
10. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of technology and information by setting the direction for how technology and information should be approached and addressed in the organisation.
11. The governing body should approve policy that articulates and gives effect to its set direction on the employment of technology and information.
12. The governing body should delegate to management the responsibility to implement and execute effective technology and information management.
13. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of technology and information management and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
a. Integration of people, technologies, information and processes across the organisation.
b. Integration of technology and information risks into organisation-wide risk management.
c. Arrangements to provide for business resilience.
d. Proactive monitoring of intelligence to identify and respond to incidents, including cyber attacks and adverse social media events.
e. Management of the performance of, and the risks pertaining to, third-party and outsourced service providers.
f. The assessment of value delivered to the organisation through significant investments in technology and information, including the evaluation of projects throughout their life cycles and of significant operational expenditure.
g. The responsible disposal of obsolete technology and information in a way that has regard to environmental impact and information security.
h. Ethical and responsible use of technology and information.
i. Compliance with relevant laws.
14. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of the management of information and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
a. The leveraging of information to sustain and enhance the organisation’s intellectual capital.
b. An information architecture that supports confidentiality, integrity and availability of information.
c. The protection of privacy of personal information.
d. The continual monitoring of security of information.
15. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of the management of technology and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
a. A technology architecture that enables the achievement of strategic and operational objectives.
b. The management of the risks pertaining to the sourcing of technology.
c. Monitoring and appropriate responses to developments in technology, including the capturing of potential opportunities and the management of disruptive effects on the organisation and its business model.
16. The governing body should consider the need to receive periodic independent assurance on the effectiveness of the organisation’s technology and information arrangements, including outsourced services.
17. The following should be disclosed in relation to technology and information:
a. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing technology and information.
b. Key areas of focus during the reporting period, including objectives, significant changes in policy, significant acquisitions and remedial actions taken as a result of major incidents.
c. Actions taken to monitor the effectiveness of technology and information management and how the outcomes were addressed.
d. Planned areas of future focus.

Compliance governance

Principle 13:

The governing body should govern compliance with applicable laws and adopted, non-binding rules, codes and standards in a way that supports the organisation being ethical and a good corporate citizen.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
18. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of compliance with applicable laws and adopted, non-binding rules, codes and standards by setting the direction for how compliance should be approached and addressed in the organisation.
19. The governing body should approve policy that articulates and gives effect to its direction on compliance, and that identifies which non-binding rules, codes and standards the organisation has adopted.
20. The governing body should delegate to management responsibility for implementation and execution of effective compliance management.
21. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of compliance and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
a. Compliance being understood not only for the obligations it creates, but also for the rights and protections it affords.
b. Compliance management taking a holistic view of how applicable laws and non-binding rules, codes and standards relate to one another.
c. Continual monitoring of the regulatory environment and appropriate responses to changes and developments.
22. The governing body should consider the need to receive periodic independent assurance on the effectiveness of compliance management.
23. The following should be disclosed in relation to compliance:
a. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing compliance.
b. Key areas of focus during the reporting period.
c. Actions taken to monitor the effectiveness of compliance management and how the outcomes were addressed.
d. Planned areas of future focus.
24. Material or repeated regulatory penalties, sanctions or fines for contraventions of, or non-compliance with, statutory obligations, whether imposed on the organisation or on members of the governing body or officers should be disclosed.
25. Details of monitoring and compliance inspections by environmental regulators, findings of non-compliance with environmental laws, or criminal sanctions and prosecutions for such non-compliance should be disclosed.

Remuneration governance

Principle 14:

The governing body should ensure that the organisation remunerates fairly, responsibly and transparently so as to promote the achievement of strategic objectives and positive outcomes in the short, medium and long term.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Remuneration policy
26. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of remuneration by setting the direction for how remuneration should be approached and addressed on an organisation-wide basis.
27. The governing body should approve policy that articulates and gives effect to its direction on fair, responsible and transparent remuneration.
28. The remuneration policy should be designed to achieve the following objectives:
a. To attract, motivate, reward and retain human capital.
b. To promote the achievement of strategic objectives within the organisation’s risk appetite.
c. To promote positive outcomes.
d. To promote an ethical culture and responsible corporate citizenship.
29. The remuneration policy should address organisation-wide remuneration and include provision for the following specifically:
a. Arrangements towards ensuring that the remuneration of executive management is fair and responsible in the context of overall employee remuneration in the organisation.
b. The use of performance measures that support positive outcomes across the economic, social and environmental context in which the organisation operates; and/or all the capitals that the organisation uses or affects.
c. If the organisation is a company, the voting by shareholders on the remuneration policy and implementation report, and for the implementation of related responding measures as outlined under Voting on Remuneration below.
30. All elements of remuneration that are offered in the organisation and the mix of these should be set out in the remuneration policy, including:
a. base salary, including financial and non-financial benefits;
b. variable remuneration, including short and long-term incentives and deferrals;
c. payments on termination of employment or office;
d. sign-on, retention and restraint payments;
e. the provisions, if any, for pre-vesting forfeiture (malus) and post-vesting forfeiture (claw-back) of remuneration;
f. any commissions and allowances; and
g. the fees of non-executive members of the governing body.
31. The governing body should oversee that the implementation and execution of the remuneration policy achieves the objectives of the policy.

Remuneration report
32. The governing body should ensure that remuneration is disclosed by means of a remuneration report in three parts:
a. A background statement.
b. An overview of the main provisions of the remuneration policy.
c. An implementation report which contains details of all remuneration awarded to individual members of the governing body and executive management during the reporting period.

Background statement
33. The background statement should briefly provide context for remuneration considerations and decisions, with reference to:
a. internal and external factors that influenced remuneration;
b. the most recent results of voting on the remuneration policy and the implementation report and the measures taken in response thereto;
c. key areas of focus and key decisions taken by the remuneration committee during the reporting period, including any substantial changes to the remuneration policy;
d. whether remuneration consultants have been used, and whether the remuneration committee is satisfied that they were independent and objective;
e. the views of the remuneration committee on whether the remuneration policy achieved its stated objectives; and
f. future areas of focus.

Overview of remuneration policy
34. The overview of the main provisions of the remuneration policy should address the objectives of the policy and the manner in which the policy seeks to accomplish these. The overview should include the following:
a. The remuneration elements and design principles informing the remuneration arrangements for executive management and, at a high level, for other employees.
b. Details of any obligations in executive employment contracts which could give rise to payments on termination of employment or office.
c. A description of the framework and performance measures used to assess the achievement of strategic objectives and positive outcomes, including the relative weighting of each performance measure and the period of time over which it is measured.
d. An illustration of the potential consequences on the total remuneration for executive management, on a single, total figure basis, of applying the remuneration policy under minimum, on-target and maximum performance outcomes.
e. An explanation of how the policy addresses fair and responsible remuneration for executive management in the context of overall employee remuneration.
f. The use and justification of remuneration benchmarks.
g. The basis for the setting of fees for non-executive directors.
h. A reference to an electronic link to the full remuneration policy for public access.

Implementation report
35. The implementation report, which includes the remuneration disclosure in terms of the Companies Act, should reflect the following:
a. The remuneration of each member of executive management, which should include in separate tables:
 i. a single, total figure of remuneration, received and receivable for the reporting period, and all the remuneration elements that it comprises, each disclosed at fair value;
ii. the details of all awards made under variable remuneration incentive schemes in the current and prior years that have not yet vested, including the number of awards; the values at date of grant; their award, vesting and expiry dates (where applicable); and the fair value at the end of the reporting period; and
iii. the cash value of all awards made under variable remuneration incentive schemes that were settled during the reporting period.
b. An account of the performance measures used and the relative weighting of each, as a result of which awards under variable remuneration incentive schemes have been made, including: the targets set for the performance measures and the corresponding value of the award opportunity; and for each performance measure, how the organisation and executive managers, individually, performed against the set targets.
c. Separate disclosure of, and reasons for, any payments made on termination of employment or office.
d. A statement regarding compliance with, and any deviations from, the remuneration policy.

Voting on remuneration (only applicable to companies)
36. In terms of the Companies Act, fees for non-executive directors for their services as directors must be submitted for approval by special resolution by shareholders within the two years preceding payment.
37. The remuneration policy and the implementation report should be tabled every year for separate non-binding advisory votes by shareholders at the AGM.
38 The remuneration policy should record the measures that the board commits to take in the event that either the remuneration policy or the implementation report, or both have been voted against by 25% or more of the voting rights exercised. Such measures should provide for taking steps in good faith and with best reasonable effort towards the following at a minimum:
a. An engagement process to ascertain the reasons for the dissenting votes.
b. Appropriately addressing legitimate and reasonable objections and concerns raised, which may include amending the remuneration policy, or clarifying or adjusting remuneration governance and/or processes.
39. In the event that either the remuneration policy or the implementation report, or both were voted against by 25% or more of the voting rights exercised, the following should be disclosed in the background statement of the remuneration report succeeding the voting:
a. with whom the company engaged, and the manner and form of engagement to ascertain the reasons for dissenting votes; and
b. the nature of steps taken to address legitimate and reasonable objections and concerns.

Assurance

Principle 15:

The governing body should ensure that assurance services and functions enable an effective control environment, and that these support the integrity of information for internal decision-making and of the organisation’s external reports.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Combined assurance
40. The governing body should assume responsibility for assurance by setting the direction concerning the arrangements for assurance services and functions. The governing body should delegate to the audit committee, if in place, the responsibility for overseeing that those arrangements are effective in achieving the following objectives:
a. Enabling an effective internal control environment.
b. Supporting the integrity of information used for internal decision-making by management, the governing body and its committees.
c. Supporting the integrity of external reports.
41. The governing body should satisfy itself that a combined assurance model is applied which incorporates and optimises the various assurance services and functions so that, taken as a whole, these support the objectives for assurance.
42. The governing body should oversee that the combined assurance model is designed and implemented to cover effectively the organisation’s significant risks and material matters through a combination of the following assurance service providers and functions as is appropriate for the organisation:
a. The organisation’s line functions that own and manage risks.
b. The organisation’s specialist functions that facilitate and oversee risk management and compliance.
c. Internal auditors, internal forensic fraud examiners and auditors, safety and process assessors, and statutory actuaries.
d. Independent external assurance service providers such as external auditors.
e. Other external assurance providers such as sustainability and environmental auditors, external actuaries, and external forensic fraud examiners and auditors.
f. Regulatory inspectors.
43. The governing body and its committees should assess the output of the organisation’s combined assurance with objectivity and professional skepticism, and by applying an enquiring mind, form their own opinion on the integrity of information and reports, and the degree to which an effective control environment has been achieved.

Assurance of external reports
44. The governing body should assume responsibility for the integrity of external reports issued by the organisation by setting the direction for how assurance of these should be approached and addressed.
45. The governing body’s direction in this regard should take into account legal requirements in relation to assurance, with the following additional considerations:
a. Whether assurance should be applied to the underlying data used to prepare a report, or to the process for preparing and presenting a report, or both.
b. Whether the nature, scope and extent of assurance are suited to the intended audience and purpose of a report.
c. The specification of applicable criteria for the measurement or evaluation of the underlying subject matter of the report.
46. The governing body should satisfy itself that the combined assurance model is effective and sufficiently robust for the governing body to be able to place reliance on the combined assurance underlying the statements that the governing body makes concerning the integrity of the organisation’s external reports.
47. External reports should disclose information about the type of assurance process applied to each report, in addition to the independent, external audit opinions provided in terms of legal requirements. This information should include:
a. a brief description of the nature, scope and extent of the assurance functions, services and processes underlying the preparation and presentation of the report; and
b. a statement by the governing body on the integrity of the report and the basis for this statement, with reference to the assurance applied.

Refer to Part 5.3: Audit committee for recommended disclosures by the audit committee concerning the organisation’s application of combined assurance.

Internal audit
48. The governing body should assume responsibility for internal audit by setting the direction for the internal audit arrangements needed to provide objective and relevant assurance that contributes to the effectiveness of governance, risk management and control processes. The governing body should delegate oversight of internal audit to the audit committee, if in place.
49. The governing body should approve an internal audit charter that defines the role and associated responsibilities and authority of internal audit, including addressing its role within combined assurance and the internal audit standards to be adopted.
50. The governing body should ensure that the arrangements for internal audit provide for the necessary skills and resources to address the complexity and volume of risk faced by the organisation, and that internal audit is supplemented as required by specialist services such as those provided by forensic fraud examiners and auditors, safety and process assessors, and statutory actuaries.
51. If a chief audit executive (CAE) position is provided for in the arrangements for internal audit, the governing body should ensure that the position is set up to function independently from management who designs and implements the controls that are in place, and that the position carries the necessary authority.
52. The governing body should approve the appointment of the CAE, including the employment contract and remuneration of the CAE, and ensure that the person who fills the position has the necessary competence, gravitas and objectivity.
53. For reasons of independence, the CAE should have access to the chair of the audit committee.
54. For reasons of independence, the CAE should not be a member of executive management, but should be invited to attend executive meetings, as necessary, to be informed about strategy and policy decisions and their implementation.
55. Where internal audit services are co-sourced or outsourced, the governing body should ensure that there is clarity on who fulfils the role of CAE.
56. The CAE should report to the chair of the audit committee on the performance of duties and functions that relate to internal audit. On other duties and administrative matters, the CAE should report to the member of executive management designated for this purpose as appropriate for the organisation.
57. The governing body should have primary responsibility for the removal of the CAE.
58. The governing body should monitor on an ongoing basis that internal audit:
a. follows an approved risk-based internal audit plan; and
b. reviews the organisational risk profile regularly, and proposes adaptations to the internal audit plan accordingly.
59. The governing body should ensure that internal audit provides an overall statement annually as to the effectiveness of the organisation’s governance, risk management and control processes.
60. The governing body should ensure that an external, independent quality review of the internal audit function is conducted at least once every five years.
61. The governing body should obtain confirmation annually from the CAE that internal audit conforms to a recognised industry code of ethics.

Refer to Part 5.3: Audit committee for recommended disclosures by the audit committee concerning internal audit arrangements and the internal control environment.

PART 5.5: STAKEHOLDER RELATIONSHIPS

Stakeholders

Principle 16:

In the execution of its governance role and responsibilities, the governing body should adopt a stakeholder-inclusive approach that balances the needs, interests and expectations of material stakeholders in the best interests of the organisation over time.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES

Stakeholder relationships
 1. The governing body should assume responsibility for the governance of stakeholder relationships by setting the direction for how stakeholder relationships should be approached and conducted in the organisation.
 2. The governing body should approve policy that articulates and gives effect to its direction on stakeholder relationships.
 3. The governing body should delegate to management the responsibility for implementation and execution of effective stakeholder relationship management.
 4. The governing body should exercise ongoing oversight of stakeholder relationship management and, in particular, oversee that it results in the following:
 5. Methodologies for identifying individual stakeholders and stakeholder groupings.
 6. Determination of material stakeholders based on the extent to which they affect, or are affected by, the activities, outputs and outcomes of the organisation.
 7. Management of stakeholder risk as an integral part of organisation-wide risk management.
 8. Formal mechanisms for engagement and communication with stakeholders, including the use of dispute resolution mechanisms and associated processes.
 9. Measurement of the quality of material stakeholder relationships, and appropriate responses to the outcomes.
 5. The following should be disclosed in relation to stakeholder relationships:
 6. An overview of the arrangements for governing and managing stakeholder relationships.
 7. Key areas of focus during the reporting period.
 8. Actions taken to monitor the effectiveness of stakeholder management and how the outcomes were addressed.
 9. Future areas of focus.

Shareholder relationships (Applicable to companies only)
 6. The board should oversee that the company encourages proactive engagement with shareholders, including engagement at the annual general meeting (AGM) of the company.
 7. All directors should be available at the AGM to respond to shareholders’ queries on how the board executed its governance duties.
 8. The board should ensure that the designated partner of the external audit firm attends the AGM.
 9. The board should ensure that shareholders are equitably treated, and that the interests of minority shareholders are adequately protected.
10. The minutes of the AGMs of listed companies should be made publicly available.

Relationships within a group of companies (Applicable to companies within a group)
11. The board of the holding company should assume responsibility for governance across the group by setting the direction for how the relationships and exercise of power within the group should be approached and conducted.
12. The board should approve a group governance framework that articulates and gives effect to its direction on relationships and the exercise of authority across the group.
13. The adoption and implementation of the policies, structures and procedures of the holding company is a matter for consideration and approval by the board of the subsidiary company as a separate legal entity. The board of the holding company should therefore ensure that the boards of its subsidiaries are included in the development of the group governance framework.
14. The board of the holding company should ensure that the group governance framework does not conflict with the memoranda of incorporation, delegations of authority, shareholder agreements, board charters, board committee terms of reference, and related policies and agreements within the group.
15. The board of the holding company should ensure that the group governance framework recognises each subsidiary within the group as a separate and independent juristic person to whom its directors owe fiduciary duties.
16. The board of the holding company should ensure that the group governance framework addresses governance matters as is appropriate for the group, including the following:
a. Delineation of the rights and role of the holding company.
b. If applicable, delegation of certain responsibilities by the board of a subsidiary to a board committee of the holding company, without abdicating accountability, and subject to agreed reporting and information- sharing arrangements.
c. The extent to which governance and operational policies of the holding company have been adopted by subsidiary companies in the group.
d. Engagement by the holding company with the board of a subsidiary company before the holding company exercises its rights to elect directors to the board of the subsidiary.
e. Arrangements to address the risk of breaching legal duty in relation to the use of information obtained while acting as director of one company in the group for the purposes of another company in the group.
17. The board of the holding company should ensure that the agreed group governance framework is implemented across the group.
18. The holding company should disclose an overview of the group governance framework that is implemented across the group.
19. The subsidiary company should disclose what responsibilities it has delegated to board committees of the holding company and the extent to which it has adopted the policies and procedures of the holding company.

Responsibilities of institutional investors

Principle 17:

The governing body of an institutional investor organisation should ensure that responsible investment is practiced by the organisation to promote the good governance and the creation of value by the companies in which it invests.
RECOMMENDED PRACTICES
20. The governing body of an institutional investor should assume responsibility for governing responsible investing by setting the direction for how it should be approached and conducted by the organisation.
21. The governing body should approve policy that articulates its direction on responsible investment. This policy should provide for the adoption of a recognised responsible investment code, principles and practices.
22. The governing body should delegate to management, if in place, or alternatively, to the outsourced service provider if investment decisions and investment activities are outsourced, the responsibility to implement and execute its policy on responsible investment.
23. Where the institutional investor outsources investment decisions or investment activities to custodians, nominees, consultants or other service providers, the governing body should oversee that the outsourcing is regulated by formal mandate which reflects and gives effect to its responsible investment policy.
24. The governing body should ensure that service providers are held accountable for complying with the formal mandate.
25. The responsible investment code adopted by the institutional investor and the application of its principles and practices should be disclosed.


End of Document
King IV Code on Corporate Governance
Page 2 of 3


