



Chapter 3 Ethical Practices and Organisational Integrity
King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance


King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King II: Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa - 2002  >  Section 4 - Integrated Sustainability Reporting

Chapter 3
Ethical Practices and Organisational Integrity
 1. A company’s ethics refer to the principles, norms and standards that it promotes for the guidance and conduct of its activities, internal relations and interactions with external stakeholders, in accordance with established values. Thus, ethical business conduct means that a company’s stakeholders - most notably its staff - adhere to defined standards of behaviour in all their business decisions and actions.
 2. Cultural values and norms may differ among individuals, varying from Western notions of individualism to African notions of participation and inclusiveness. Companies should develop a culture of conduct based on generally accepted behaviour and on their own organisational values, as embedded in their mission and vision statements.
 3. The existence of - and demonstrable adherence to - established principles of ethical conduct provide a strong measure of organisational integrity.  A company’s ethical principles represent a major motivator of stakeholder involvement with it and, as such, should permeate its culture, motivating its strategy, business goals, policies and activities. A company’s ethics programme should, therefore, involve both behavioural and structural aspects.
 4. To be meaningful, a company’s ethical principles should be informed by, and relevant to, the various stakeholder constituencies whose interactions with the company they are designed to cover.  Stakeholders should be actively involved in the process of identifying the ethical principles and standards that will guide organisational practice, in terms of behaviour and accountability, in areas such as:
4.1. responsibilities to shareowners and the financial community, including disclosure, accounting practices, insider trading, and conflicts of interest;
4.2. relations with customers and suppliers, including marketing issues, the use of market power, pricing practices, description of goods and services, quality and safety of goods, and recall and related practices;
4.3. employment practices, including equality of opportunity, occupational health and safety, other principles related to employers and employees; and
4.4. responsibility to the community, including support for community activities, social investment, and attention to social and environmental impact.
 5. Ethical principles should be codified in a manner whereby they are easily communicable to stakeholders. Codes of ethical practice should be broad and aspirational enough to guide decision-making by employees and other stakeholders in unprecedented situations, but contextualised enough to give practical guidance. They should be made readily available to stakeholders.   Key decisions in developing a code of ethics are set out, as guidance, in Appendix VIII.
 6. A code of ethics should be formulated and implemented in order to:
6.1. make clear what is acceptable, and unacceptable, practice;
6.2. guide company policy by providing a set of corporate ethical standards;
6.3. encourage ethical behaviour of the board, managers and employees at all levels;
6.4. guide difficult decision-making;
6.5. make ethical infringements easy to identify;
6.6. promote awareness of, and sensitivity to, ethical issues;
6.7. help to resolve conflicts;
6.8. specify the enterprise’s social responsibility;
6.9. cover relations between stakeholders; and
6.10. enhance the ethical reputation of the organisation.
 7. Core ethical principles that all companies should aspire to, and that will demonstrate a commitment to organisational integrity are:
7.1. fairness;
7.2. transparency; 
7.3. honesty;
7.4. non-discrimination;
7.5. accountability and responsibility; and
7.6. respect for human dignity, human rights and social justice.
 8. The formulation and adoption of principles and standards of ethical business conduct are meaningless without demonstrable adherence. Structural measures which can be introduced as part of an ethics programme to support embedded ethical business practices, could include, for example:
8.1. regular and formal identification of ethical risk areas;
8.2. development and strengthening of monitoring and compliance policies, procedures and systems;
8.3. establishment of easily accessible safe reporting (e.g. “whistle-blowing”) channels;
8.4. alignment of the company’s disciplinary code with its code of ethical practice.
8.5. development of performance measurement and remuneration systems that reward ethical behaviour and punish unethical behaviour;
8.6. integrity assessment as part of selection and promotion procedures;
8.7. induction of new appointees;
8.8. training on ethical principles, standards and decision-making;
8.9. regular monitoring of compliance with ethical principles and standards, e.g. using the internal audit function;
8.10. reporting to stakeholders on compliance ; and
8.11. independent verification of conformance to established principles and standards of ethical behaviour.
 9. Companies should monitor and evaluate compliance with established ethical principles and standards on a regular basis.  They should reconsider the nature and extent of their relationship with any stakeholder (including employees) that does not show an appropriate commitment to such principles and standards.
10. Development and full implementation of an ethics programme may take a considerable amount of time.  Regular interim reports on progress should be made available during the implementation process.
11. The following aspirational guidelines can be identified, in terms of responsibilities for establishing and maintaining organisational integrity through demonstrable ethical conduct within a company:
11.1. The Board of Directors should:
• establish the values of the company in support of its vision and mission;
• establish principles and standards of ethical business practice for the company in support of such values;
• determine the ethics direction and strategy of the company;
• ensure communication of established principles and standards to affected stakeholders in codified form; and
• assume responsibility and accountability to stakeholders for compliance with such principles and standards (acting through a sub-committee or named individual if appropriate).
11.2. Management should:
• support ethical behaviour, both formally and informally, leading by example;
• foster an environment within which ethical business practice is promoted, developed and maintained; and
• ensure compliance with established principles and standards of ethical behaviour and practice.
11.3. Employees should be:
• empowered to support the company’s ethical principles and comply with established standards in their day-to-day activities;
• held accountable for their ethical conduct; and
• rewarded for complying with established principles and standards of ethical conduct and subjected to appropriate disciplinary measures for failing to do so.
11.4. Suppliers, consultants and contractors should be made aware of:
• the ethical principles and standards of the company;
• its expectations of them in this regard; and
• the consequences of non-compliance.
12. Specific laws also address issues that have significance within a business environment from an ethical point of view and they should be respected and complied with by the business community.31
13. A compliance system based on legal requirements alone is not enough to curb unethical behaviour within the business community.  Measures supplementing this, for example, include the Federal Sentencing Guidelines adopted in the United States.

   The Federal Sentencing Guidelines present the business community with both a “carrot” and a “stick” to foster and promote strong ethical behaviour.  Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, it costs a company under prosecution far more, in terms of heavy fines and rigorous probation conditions, if unethical conduct leads to a lawsuit (the “stick”).  However, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines also reward companies that have effective ethics and compliance programmes in place, either by not prosecuting them at all, or at least by reducing their fine if they are found guilty (the “carrot”).
   In other words, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines have sent a very clear message to boards and directors in the US that it is their duty not only to do all they can to uncover, report and punish unethical and illegal conduct, but to prevent such conduct. 
14. While the model provided by the Federal Sentencing Guidelines might not be entirely appropriate to South Africa, similar parameters might prove constructive in stressing the importance of actively combating unethical behaviour in the workplace.  The Federal Sentencing Guidelines provide seven basic principles for developing an ethics and compliance programme:
14.1. establish compliance standards and procedures;
14.2. assign high level individuals to oversee compliance;
14.3. exercise due care in delegating discretionary authority;
14.4. communicate with and train all employees regarding company values and compliance procedures;
14.5. monitor, audit and provide safe reporting systems;
14.6. enforce appropriate discipline with consistency; and
14.7. respond to offences and prevent recurrence.
15. While prescriptive measures are necessary, at least to define desirable and undesirable forms of behaviour, the challenge for companies in South Africa is to take the moral initiative.  By its very nature, corporate governance has an ethical dimension that can be viewed as the moral obligation for directors to take care of the interests of investors and other stakeholders.  The moral objectives of the company, exemplified by the board collectively and the directors individually, needs to be made visible to both internal and external stakeholders and seen to be integral with other corporate objectives.  It is clear that governing the moral performance of a company challenges directors and managers to assume responsibilities that are often new and untested.  They must face up to this challenge, however.  Failure to do so might discourage investment and will almost certainly damage the company’s integrity and the reputation of its board, directors, managers, employees and other internal and external stakeholders closely associated with it.
16. Company standards and procedures usually find expression in a company’s specific code of conduct or statement of business principles, or code of ethics or such similar document.  Successful codes are those that take into account not just company-specific issues, but recognise industry, national and international best practice.  From a South African perspective, the King Report 1994 provided a generic code of aspirational principles that is available from the Institute of Directors in Southern Africa. A national standard, which has been lacking  in South Africa, should not prescribe detailed behaviour to individual companies.  Rather, it should provide the framework for organisational integrity, referring to the role of international, industry and company standards within this process, and a typical example would be the revised SANCode. The SANCode can be obtained from the Institute of Directors.


Footnotes
31	   Examples are:

   Prevention of Organised Crime Act No. 121 of 1998 (anti-corruption measures);
   Insider Trading Act No. 135 of 1998 (conflict of interest, fair business practices, honesty);
   Employment Equity Act No. 55 of 1998 (promotion of development of human capital);
   Labour Relations Act No. 66 of 1995 (employment practices and relationships between employees and employers); 
   Promotion of Equality and prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act No. 4 of 2000 (fair treatment of employees, 
   anti-racism, etc.)


End of Document
Chapter 3 Ethical Practices and Organisational Integrity
Page 2 of 3


