



Chapter 3 Audit committees
King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance


King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King III: Report on Governance for South Africa - 2009

Chapter 3
Audit committees

Principle 3.1:
The board should ensure that the company has an effective and independent audit committee 1. An independent audit committee fulfils a vital role in corporate governance. The audit committee is vital to, among other things, ensure the integrity of integrated reporting and internal financial controls and identify and manage financial risks.
 2. The recommendations in this chapter are subject to specific legislation and regulations applicable to a company.
 3. The shareholders of a public company and a state-owned company must elect the members of an audit committee at each AGM. This does not apply where a company is a subsidiary company of another company that has an audit committee and the audit committee of the holding or parent company will perform the functions required by Section 94 of the Act on behalf of that subsidiary. (Section 94 is included in the Annex to this chapter.) The nomination committee (or other board committee tasked with this) should present shareholders with suitable candidates for election or re-election as audit committee members.
 4. Private companies, not for profit companies and personal liability companies should voluntarily appoint an audit committee. The memorandum of incorporation of these companies should be carefully considered and drafted setting out the composition and duties of the audit committee.
 5. The board and management of any company, regardless of size, should be fully committed to the goal of supporting and maintaining an effective audit committee.
 6. The board should approve a written terms of reference for the audit committee which should inform its agenda and work plan to ensure that all the audit committee’s responsibilities are addressed in each financial year.
 7. The audit committee chairman should, in consultation with the company secretary, decide the frequency and timing of its meetings. The audit committee should meet as frequently as is necessary to perform its functions, but should meet at least twice a year. Reasonable time should be allocated for all audit committee meetings.
 8. The audit committee should meet at least once a year with the external and internal auditors without management being present. These may be separate meetings or meetings held before or after a scheduled audit committee meeting.

Membership and resources of the audit committee

Principle 3.2:
Audit committee members should be suitably skilled and experienced independent non-executive directors 9. All members of the audit committee of a public company and state owned company must be independent non-executive directors (refer to Chapter 2 for the definition of an independent non-executive director). Where an audit committee is appointed at subsidiary level and the holding company has an audit committee that will perform the functions required in terms of Section 94 of the Act on behalf of that subsidiary, executive directors within the group may be appointed as audit committee members of the subsidiary. However, the directors must be non-executive in relation to the specific subsidiary.
10. The audit committee should consist of at least three members.
11. The chairman of the board has a strategic and comprehensive role to play in guiding the board and cannot simultaneously lead and participate objectively in the audit committee. The chairman of the board should therefore not be eligible for appointment as an audit committee member but may attend audit committee meetings by invitation.
12. There should be a basic level of qualification and experience for audit committee membership, even though the members may have been appointed by the shareholders. The nomination committee (or other board committee tasked with this) and the board should evaluate whether collectively (but not necessarily individually) the audit committee has an understanding of:
12.1 integrated reporting, which includes financial reporting;
12.2 internal financial controls;
12.3 external audit process;
12.4 internal audit process;
12.5 corporate law;
12.6 risk management;
12.7 sustainability issues;
12.8 information technology governance as it relates to integrated reporting; and
12.9 the governance processes within the company.
13. The collective skills of the members of the audit committee should be appropriate to the company’s size and circumstances, as well as its industry.
14. Because of the audit committee’s responsibility to oversee integrated reporting, there is a clear need for this committee, collectively, to have an understanding of International Financial Reporting Standards, South African Statements of Generally Accepted Accounting Practice, the guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative and any other financial or sustainability reporting standards, regulations or guidelines applicable to the company.
15. All audit committee members should meet predetermined skills, competency and experience requirements to collectively be proficient in asking probing questions on the topics listed in paragraph 12. The audit committee is, however, allowed to consult with specialists or consultants engaged by the audit committee to assist it with the performance of its functions, subject to a board-approved process. Such specialists or consultants should not be considered to be members of the committee and should not be entitled to vote on any matters.
16. Audit committee members collectively should keep up to date with key developments affecting their required skills set.
17. The board must appoint a person to fill a vacancy on the audit committee should such vacancy arise. Such an appointment must be ratified by the shareholders at the subsequent AGM.

Principle 3.3:
The audit committee should be chaired by an independent non-executive director18. The board should appoint the chairman of the audit committee.
19. The chairman of the audit committee should understand the function of the audit committee and be able to lead constructive dialogue with the management, the internal and external auditors, other external assurance providers and the board. The chairman should be afforded sufficient time to participate in and agree upon the audit committee agenda before meetings are convened.
20. The chairman of the audit committee should be present at the AGM to answer questions, through the chairman of the board, on the report on the audit committee’s activities and matters within the scope of the audit committee’s responsibilities.

Responsibilities of the audit committee
21. The Act has transformed the audit committee of listed companies and state owned companies from being a committee of the board to a separate statutory committee that is appointed by the shareholders. However, as indicated by Section 94(10) of the Act, the audit committee still forms part of a unitary board even though it has specific statutory responsibilities over and above responsibilities assigned to it by the board.
22. Legal opinion indicates that the audit committee takes primary responsibility for and has the ultimate decision-making ability regarding its statutory duties. If differences of opinion should arise between the board and the audit committee where the audit committee’s statutory functions are concerned, the audit committee’s decision will prevail.
23. The audit committee serves as a committee of the board for duties assigned to it by the board over and above its statutory duties. The board retains the ultimate decision making ability on such matters. 

Principle 3.4:
The audit committee should oversee integrated reporting
Integrated reports
24. Every year all companies should prepare an integrated report that conveys adequate information about the social, economic and environmental impact of the company on the community in which it operates. (Refer to Chapter 9 for more information on integrated reporting.)
25. In its consideration of the integrated report, the audit committee should consider any factors that may predispose the management to present an incomplete or misleading picture of the company’s position, performance or sustainability. Such factors may include, for example, a perceived need to counter adverse market sentiment or to report the achievement of performance targets on which bonus payments depend.
26. The audit committee should be responsible for evaluating the significant judgments and reporting decisions affecting the integrated report made by management, including changes in accounting policies, decisions requiring a major element of judgement and the clarity and completeness of the proposed financial and sustainability disclosures. It should require explanations from management on the accounting of significant or unusual transactions and should consider the views of the external auditor’s in these instances. The audit committee should understand how the board and the external auditor (and any other relevant external assurance provider) evaluate materiality for integrated reporting purposes.
27. The audit committee should be informed of any monitoring or enforcement actions against the company, for example by a regulatory agency, on a timely basis, to allow the audit committee to be involved in the company’s response to such monitoring or actions.
28. The audit committee should consider any evidence that comes to its attention that brings into question any previously published financial or sustainability information, including complaints about this information. Where necessary, the audit committee should take steps to recommend that the company publicly correct the previously published financial or sustainability information if it is materially incorrect.
29. The audit committee should carefully review forward-looking statements of financial or sustainability information to ensure that the information provides a proper appreciation of the key drivers that will enable the company to achieve these forward-looking goals.

Financial
30. The audit committee has a specific responsibility to comment on the financial statements, the accounting practices and the internal financial control of the company and as such the audit committee, should keep the board apprised on these matters.
31. The audit committee’s review of financial reports should encompass the annual financial statements, interim reports, preliminary or provisional result announcements, summarised integrated information, any other intended release of price-sensitive financial information and prospectuses, trading statements, circulars and similar documents. Scrutiny by the audit committee should not be confined to the primary financial statements and should extend to all relevant narrative information which should present a balanced view of the company’s performance.
32. The audit committee should be informed when there is a disagreement on auditing or accounting matters between the management and the external auditors. Where an accounting opinion has been requested from a person other than the external auditor of the company, the reasoning for the accounting treatment adopted should be obtained and should be approved by the audit committee before the committee’s recommendation is made to the board. The audit committee should also be satisfied with the credentials of the person providing such an opinion.
33. For the audit committee to assist the board to make a statement on the going concern status of the company, it should review a documented assessment prepared by management of the going concern status of the company. To enable the audit committee to conduct a thorough discussion, management should document the key assumptions in reaching their conclusions.

Sustainability
34. The board is responsible for the integrity of integrated reporting. The audit committee should be tasked by the board to assist by overseeing the integrity of the integrated report. As part of this assigned responsibility, the audit committee should recommend the annual financial statements for approval by the board. The overseeing of sustainability issues in the integrated report should be delegated to the audit committee by the board.
35. The audit committee should assist the board in approving the disclosure of sustainability issues in the integrated report by ensuring that the information is reliable and that no conflicts or differences arise when compared with the financial results.
36. The audit committee should recommend to the board to engage an external assurance provider to provide assurance over material elements (such elements should be determined by the relevant committee responsible for overseeing the sustainability reporting) of the sustainability part of the integrated report. The audit committee should evaluate the independence and credentials of the external assurance provider.

Interim results
37. The board should periodically review the needs of users of financial information of the company and, based on that review, determine whether interim information should be provided every six months or more frequently, for example quarterly.
38. The audit committee should consider whether the external auditor should perform assurance procedures on interim results and should make a recommendation to the board in this regard. Considerations could include modifying the audit report on the last set of annual financial statements or identifying issues regarding the previously issued interim results.
39. Where the external auditor is engaged to perform a review of the interim results, the audit committee should review the results of such engagement.
40. Where the external auditor is appointed to perform a publicly reported review of the interim results, the report of the external auditor should be made available to users of the interim results and should be summarised in the interim results.

Summarised information
41. Due to the volume and complexity of information conveyed in the integrated report, users benefit from a summary of the integrated report. The company should therefore prepare a summarised integrated report in addition to the complete integrated report.
42. The objective of the summarised integrated report is to give a concise but balanced view of the company’s integrated information. In preparing the summarised integrated report, companies should give due consideration to:
42.1 providing key financial information. The International Financial Reporting Standard on Interim Reporting (IAS 34) provides useful guidance as to which financial information and notes should be included;
42.2 providing sufficient commentary by the company to ensure an unbiased, succinct overview of the company’s financial information; and
42.3 providing the company’s key performance measures regarding sustainability information.
43. Summarised integrated information should be derived from the underlying integrated report and should include a statement to this effect.
44. The audit committee should engage the external auditors to provide an assurance report on summarised financial information, confirming that the summarised financial information is appropriately derived from the annual financial statements.
45. Both the complete and summarised integrated reports should be made available to stakeholders electronically and should be placed on the company’s website. The board should however consider the nature of its stakeholder base in determining the appropriate method of disseminating the summarised integrated report. Where a large proportion of stakeholders do not have electronic access to the company’s information, hard copies of the summarised integrated report should be made available to all the stakeholders on written request to the company’s secretary or directed to the company’s registered office. 

Principle 3.5:
The audit committee should ensure that a combined assurance model is applied to provide a coordinated approach to all assurance activities


46. A combined assurance model aims to optimise the assurance coverage obtained from management, internal assurance providers and external assurance providers on the risk areas affecting the company.
47. The audit committee should be responsible for monitoring the appropriateness of the company’s combined assurance model and ensuring that significant risks facing the company are adequately addressed.
48. The combined assurance provided by internal and external assurance providers and management should be sufficient to satisfy the audit committee that significant risk areas within the company have been adequately addressed and suitable controls exist to mitigate and reduce these risks.
49. External assurance providers may include the external auditor, regulators (inspectorate) or any other external assurance providers such as sustainability assurance providers, actuaries and geologists. The relationship between the external assurance providers and the company should be monitored by the audit committee.
50. By providing an effective counterbalance to the executive management, audit committees uphold the independence of internal and external assurance providers, thus helping to ensure that these functions are carried out effectively.

Internal assurance providers

Principle 3.6:
The audit committee should satisfy itself of the expertise, resources and experience of the company’s finance function51. Every year, the audit committee should consider and satisfy itself of the appropriateness of the expertise and adequacy of resources of the finance function and experience of the senior members of management responsible for the financial function. The results of the review should be disclosed in the integrated report.
52. Listed companies must have a finance director and the audit committee must evaluate the suitability of the expertise and experience of the finance director and recommend to the board if any changes are necessary. 

Principle 3.7:
The audit committee should be responsible for overseeing of internal audit53. The audit committee should play a key role in ensuring that the company’s internal audit function is independent and has the necessary resources, budget, standing and authority within the company to enable it to discharge its functions.
54. The audit committee should be responsible for the appointment, performance assessment and dismissal of the chief audit executive (CAE).
55. The audit committee should approve the internal audit plan, as well as oversee staffing and objectives of the internal audit function.
56. The audit committee should encourage cooperation between external and internal audit. The internal and external audit functions, however, have different scopes and purposes. The area of assurance overlap between internal and external audit should be such that it optimises the combined assurance obtained from these assurance providers.
57. The audit committee should ensure that the internal audit function is subjected to an independent quality review, either in line with IIA standards or when the audit committee determines it appropriate, as a measure to ensure the function remains effective. 

Principle 3.8:
The audit committee should be an integral component of the risk management process58. The responsibility for a company’s risk management function, specifically implementing risk management processes, is that of management.
59. The board should assign oversight of the company’s risk management function to an appropriate board committee (for example a risk committee or the audit committee). Smaller companies need not establish formal committees to perform these functions but should ensure that these functions are appropriately addressed by the board.
60. The audit committee’s charter should be clear on the scope of the audit committee’s responsibilities for risk management.
61. Where the board assigns the oversight of the risk management function to the audit committee, the audit committee’s responsibility for overseeing the risk management function should be identical to that of a risk committee in a company where a risk committee is separately established.
62. The board should ensure that there is effective communication and coordination of its oversight activities to ensure that the audit committee is informed of all significant actual or potential financial and non-financial risks (such as operational, strategic, regulatory risks) that may have implications on the integrated report.
63. Regardless of the board’s method and framework of assignment of overseeing the risk management function, the audit committee should have an understanding of, and have an adequate level of comfort regarding, the company’s process for identifying, managing and reporting on risk.
64. The audit committee should satisfy itself that the following areas have been appropriately addressed by itself, failing specific assignment by the board:
64.1 financial reporting risks;
64.2 internal financial controls;
64.3 fraud risk as it relates to financial reporting; and
64.4 IT risks as it relates to financial reporting.

Financial reporting risks
65. The audit committee should be responsible for overseeing financial risk management and controls and ensuring that the controls:
65.1 provide guidance that embeds internal financial control in the business processes and evolves to remain relevant over time;
65.2 follow a risk-based approach; and
65.3 weigh up not only the likelihood of financial risks materialising but also the costs of operating certain controls relative to the benefit gained in managing these related financial risks i.e. the cost-benefit analysis.

Internal financial controls
66. The internal audit function should at least once a year conduct a formal documented review of the design, implementation and effectiveness of the company’s system of internal financial controls by conducting suitable testing and report back to the audit committee. This enables the audit committee to perform its responsibilities to monitor the integrity of the company’s financial information and comment on the effectiveness of internal financial controls.
67. The audit committee should evaluate the nature and extent of the formal documented review of internal financial controls to be performed by internal audit on behalf of the board every year. Internal audit’s review should cover all significant areas of financial reporting to enable the audit committee to perform its responsibilities to oversee the integrity of the integrated report, specifically financial information published by the company. The audit committee should ensure that internal audit has adequate capacity to perform such formal documented review. Management may assist internal audit to perform the review.
68. It is not required that the internal audit report be made available publicly. External auditor attestation on internal financial controls is not a requirement.
69. The audit committee must conclude and report yearly to the stakeholders and the board on the effectiveness of the company’s internal financial controls. Before the audit committee concludes and reports to the board on the effectiveness of internal financial controls, it should holistically consider all information brought to its attention from all sources, including communications with, and reports from, internal audit, other assurance providers and the management, as well as the external auditors.
70. Weaknesses in financial control, whether from design, implementation or execution, that are considered material (individually or in combination with other weaknesses) and that resulted in actual material financial loss, fraud or material errors, should be reported to the board and the stakeholders. It is not intended that this disclosure be made in the form of an exhaustive list, but rather an acknowledgement of the nature and extent of material weaknesses and the corrective action, if any, that has been taken to date of the report.

Fraud risks
71. The audit committee should review arrangements made by the company to enable employees and outside whistleblowers (including customers and suppliers) to report in confidence their concerns about possible improprieties in matters of financial and sustainability reporting, or non-compliance with laws and regulations that may have a direct or indirect effect on integrated reporting.
72. The audit committee should be aware of and approve any amendments to the company’s code of conduct as it applies to integrated reporting and should satisfy itself that the management monitors compliance with the code of conduct.
73. The audit committee should consider matters that may result in material misstatements in the integrated report due to fraud.
74. The audit committee must receive and deal appropriately with any concerns or complaints (whether from within or outside the company) or on its own initiative, relating either to the accounting practices and internal audit of the company or to the content or auditing of its financial statements, the internal financial controls of the company or to any related matter. Information technology (IT) risks as it relates to financial reporting.

   Refer to Chapter 5 Principle 5.7 for more detail on the audit committee’s role in IT.
External assurance providers 

Principle 3.9:
The audit committee is responsible for recommending the appointment of the external auditor and overseeing the external audit process75. The audit committee must recommend to shareholders the appointment, reappointment and removal of the external auditor. Where the audit committee recommends to shareholders that the incumbent auditing firm and designated auditor (a statutory responsibility for public companies and state-owned companies in terms of the Act) should be appointed as the external auditor, its recommendation should be based on an assessment of the auditing firm and the individuals’ qualifications, expertise and resources, effectiveness and independence. The audit committee should ensure that the external auditor that is recommended for appointment is approved by the JSE (applicable only to listed companies).
76. The audit committee must approve the external auditor’s terms of engagement and remuneration. In doing so, it should engage with the auditor to satisfy itself that the level of remuneration is appropriate to enable an effective audit to be conducted.
77. The audit committee must review, monitor and report on the external auditor’s independence and objectivity, and should assess the effectiveness of the audit process every year. At least five yearly, rotation at an individual engagement partner or designated partner level enhances actual and perceived independence.
78. The audit committee must define a policy addressing the nature, extent and terms under which the external auditor may perform non-audit services.
79. The annual financial statements should include a description of non-audit services rendered by the external auditor, including the nature and quantity thereof. The audit committee can pre-authorise services proposed for a future date within the policy framework set by the audit committee.
80. The audit committee should review concerns identified as a result of the internal or external audit and should ensure that these are appropriately dealt with by management.
81. The board should develop a process to ensure that the audit committee receives notice of reportable irregularities (as defined in the Auditing Profession Act, 2005) that have been reported by the external auditor to the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors. Where the auditor’s report is modified as a result of a reportable irregularity, the audit committee should review the completeness and accuracy of the disclosure of such matters in the financial statements.
82. At the end of each annual audit, the audit committee should review the quality and effectiveness of the audit process. It should assess whether the external auditors have performed the audit as planned and establish the reasons for any changes, obtaining feedback as necessary about the conduct of the audit from key members of the company’s management, including the finance director and the chief audit executive.

Reporting 

Principle 3.10:
The audit committee should report to the board and shareholders on how it has discharged its duties83. The audit committee should report internally to the board on how it has discharged its duties, statutory as well as those assigned to it by the board, during the financial year.
84. The audit committee must also report to the shareholders at the AGM on how it has fulfilled its duties in terms of the Act during the financial year. The audit committee’s report at the AGM must:
84.1 describe how the audit committee carried out its functions in terms of the Act;
84.2 state whether the audit committee is satisfied that the external auditor was independent of the company; and
84.3 contain comment in any way the committee considers appropriate on the financial statements, the accounting practices and the internal financial control of the company.
85. As a minimum, the audit committee should provide the following information in the annual financial statements:
85.1 a summary of the role of the audit committee;
85.2 a statement on whether or not the audit committee has adopted a formal terms of reference that have been approved by the board and if so, whether the committee satisfied its responsibilities for the year in compliance with its terms of reference;
85.3 the names and qualifications of all members of the audit committee during the period under review, and the period for which they served on the committee;
85.4 the number of audit committee meetings held during the period under review and members’ attendance at these meetings;
85.5 a statement on whether or not the audit committee considered and recommended the internal audit charter for approval by the board;
85.6 a description of the working relationship with the chief audit executive;
85.7 information about any other responsibilities assigned to the audit committee by the board;
85.8 a statement on whether the audit committee complied with its legal, regulatory or other responsibilities; and
85.9 a statement on whether or not the audit committee recommended the integrated report to the board for approval.

Public sector perspective
86. Audit committee members of all government institutions, including public entities and state-owned companies, must comply with the minimum qualification criteria established by the executive authority.
87. The relevant executive authority in the public sector must agree with any premature termination of the services of a person serving on an audit committee.
88. For government institutions, including departments, public entities, municipalities, municipal entities and constitutional institutions in the public sector, the report of the audit committee must also include comments on the quality of the management and monthly or quarterly reports submitted under the PFMA, the MFMA and the Division of Revenue Act.
89. Should a report to an audit committee, whether from the internal audit function or any other source, implicate the accounting officer, any member of the accounting authority, or any official in financial misconduct, including fraud, corruption or negligence, the chairman of the audit committee must promptly report this to the relevant executive authority and the Auditor-General or authorised auditor.
90. The audit committee may communicate any concerns it considers necessary to the executive authority (as defined in the relevant acts), the relevant treasury (if applicable), the Auditor-General and, if appropriate, to the authorised auditor.

Annex 3.1

Extract from the Companies Act no 71 of 2008

Audit committees

94.
(1) This section—
(2) applies concurrently with section 64 of the Banks Act, to any company that is subject to that section of that Act, but subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section do not apply to the appointment of an audit committee by any such company; and
(3) does not apply to a company that has been granted an exemption in terms of section 64(4) of the Banks Act.
(2) At each annual general meeting, a public company, state-owned company or other company that is required only by its Memorandum of Incorporation to have an audit committee as contemplated in sections 34(2) and 84(l)(c)(ii), must elect an audit committee comprising at least three members, unless–
(3) the company is a subsidiary of another company that has an audit committee; and
(4) the audit committee of that other company will perform the functions required under this section on behalf of that subsidiary company.
(3) The first members of the audit committee may be appointed by–
(4) the incorporators of a company; or
(5) by the board, within 40 business days after the incorporation of the company.
(4) Each member of an audit committee of a company must–
(5) be a director of the company, who satisfies any applicable requirements prescribed in terms of subsection (5);
(6) not be—
(i) involved in the day-to-day management of the company’s business or have been so involved at any time during the previous financial year;
(ii) a prescribed officer, or full-time employee, of the company or another related or inter-related company, or have been such an officer or employee at any time during the previous three financial years; or
(iii) a material supplier or customer of the company, such that a reasonable and informed third party would conclude in the circumstances that the integrity, impartiality or objectivity of that director is compromised by that relationship; and
(7) not be related to any person who falls within any of the criteria set out in paragraph (b).
(5) The Minister may prescribe minimum qualification requirements for members of an audit committee as necessary to ensure that any such committee, taken as a whole, comprises persons with adequate relevant knowledge and experience to equip the committee to perform its functions.
(6) The board of a company contemplated in section 84(1) must appoint a person to fill any vacancy on the audit committee within 40 business days after the vacancy arises.
(7) An audit committee of a company has the following duties:
(8) to nominate, for appointment as auditor of the company under section 90, a registered auditor who, in the opinion of the audit committee, is independent of the company;
(9) to determine the fees to be paid to the auditor and the auditor’s terms of engagement;
(10) to ensure that the appointment of the auditor complies with the provisions of this Act and any other legislation relating to the appointment of auditors;
(11) to determine, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the nature and extent of any non-audit services that the auditor may provide to the company, or that the auditor must not provide to the company, or a related company;
(12) to pre-approve any proposed agreement with the auditor for the provision of non-audit services to the company;
(13) to prepare a report, to be included in the annual financial statements for that financial year–
(i) describing how the audit committee carried out its functions;
(ii) stating whether the audit committee is satisfied that the auditor was independent of the company; and
(iii) commenting in any way the committee considers appropriate on the financial statements, the accounting practices and the internal financial control of the company;
(14) to receive and deal appropriately with any concerns or complaints, whether from within or outside the company, or on its own initiative, relating to–
(i) the accounting practices and internal audit of the company;
(ii) the content or auditing of the company’s financial statements;
(iii) the internal financial controls of the company; or
(iv) any related matter;
(15) to make submissions to the board on any matter concerning the company’s accounting policies, financial control, records and reporting; and
(16) to perform such other oversight functions as may be determined by the board.
(8) In considering whether, for the purposes of this Part, a registered auditor is independent of a company, the audit committee of that company must–
(9) ascertain that the auditor does not receive any direct or indirect remuneration or other benefit from the company, except–
(i) as auditor; or
(ii) for rendering other services to the company, to the extent permitted in terms of subsection (7)(d);
(10) consider whether the auditor’s independence may have been prejudiced–
(i) as a result of any previous appointment as auditor; or
(ii) having regard to the extent of any consultancy, advisory or other work undertaken by the auditor for the company; and
(11) consider compliance with other criteria relating to independence or conflict of interest as prescribed by the Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors established by the Auditing Profession Act, in relation to the company, and if the company is a member of a group of companies, any other company within that group.
(9) Nothing in this section precludes the appointment by a company at its annual general meeting of an auditor other than one nominated by the audit committee, but if such an auditor is appointed, the appointment is valid only if the audit committee is satisfied that the proposed auditor is independent of the company.
(10) Neither the appointment nor the duties of an audit committee reduce the functions and duties of the board or the directors of the company, except with respect to the appointment, fees and terms of engagement of the auditor.
(11) A company must pay all expenses reasonably incurred by its audit committee, including, if the audit committee considers it appropriate, the fees of any consultant or specialist engaged by the audit committee to assist it in the performance of its functions.


End of Document
Chapter 3 Audit committees
Page 2 of 3


