



Code of Corporate Practices and Conduct
King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance


King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King Reports and Codes on Corporate Governance  >  King II: Report on Corporate Governance for South Africa - 2002

Code of Corporate Practices and Conduct
 1. Application of Code 
1.1. The Code applies to the following business enterprises (hereinafter referred to as “affected companies”):

      1.1.1.   All companies with securities listed on the JSE Securities Exchange South Africa.

      1.1.2.   Banks, financial and insurance entities as defined in the various legislation regulating the South African financial services sector.

      1.1.3.   Public sector enterprises and agencies that fall under the Public Finance Management Act and the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Bill (still to be promulgated) including any department of State or administration in the national, provincial or local sphere of government or any other functionary or institution: 
• exercising a power or performing a function in terms of the Constitution or a provincial constitution; or
• exercising a public power or performing a public function in terms of any legislation, but not including a Court or a judicial officer, 

         unless otherwise prescribed by legislation.
1.2. All companies, in addition to those falling within the categories listed above, should give due consideration to the application of this Code insofar as the principles are applicable.  Stakeholders interacting with such companies are encouraged to monitor the application by these companies of the principles set out in this Code (to the extent applicable).
1.3. While it is acknowledged that certain forms of State enterprises may not lend themselves to some of the principles set out in this Code, it is recommended that the principles should be adapted appropriately by such enterprises.  To assist entities falling within this category, National Treasury will be issuing “Good Practice Guides” as official directives in line with the overall framework for financial management for the public sector.
1.4. All references to “company” or “companies” in this Code and the accompanying Report should be taken to refer to “affected companies” as defined in 1.1 above.
1.5. The Code is a set of principles and does not purport to determine the detailed course of conduct of directors on any particular matter.  Clearly, companies and their boards will be required to measure the principles set out in this Code against all other statutes, regulations and other authoritative directives regulating their conduct and operation with a view to applying not only the most applicable requirements but also to seek to adhere to the best available practice that may be relevant to the company in its particular circumstances.
1.6. The Code will be effective in respect of affected companies whose financial years commence on or after 1 March 2002.  The Code should be seen as a “living document” that may require to be updated from time to time by the King Committee to ensure the currency of its recommended principles of corporate practices and conduct.
 2. Boards and Directors
2.1. The Board 

      2.1.1.   The board is the focal point of the corporate governance system.  It is ultimately accountable and responsible for the performance and affairs of the company.  Delegating authority to board committees or management does not in any way mitigate or dissipate the discharge by the board and its directors of their duties and responsibilities.

      2.1.2.   Given the positive interaction and diversity of views that take place between individuals of different skills, experience and background, the unitary board structure with executive and non-executive directors interacting in a working group remains appropriate for South African companies.

      2.1.3.   The board must give strategic direction to the company, appoint the chief executive officer and ensure that succession is planned.

      2.1.4.   The board must retain full and effective control over the company, and monitor management in implementing board plans and strategies.

      2.1.5.   The board should ensure that the company complies with all relevant laws, regulations and codes of business practice, and that it communicates with its shareowners and relevant stakeholders (internal and external) openly and promptly and with substance prevailing over form.

      2.1.6.   The board should define levels of materiality, reserving specific power to itself and delegating other matters with the necessary written authority to management.  These matters should be monitored and evaluated on a regular basis.

      2.1.7.   The board should have unrestricted access to all company information, records, documents and property.  The information needs of the board should be well defined and regularly monitored. 

      2.1.8.   The board should consider developing a corporate code of conduct that addresses conflicts of interest, particularly relating to directors and management, which should be regularly reviewed and updated as necessary.

      2.1.9.   The board should have an agreed procedure whereby directors may, if necessary, take independent professional advice at the company’s expense.

      2.1.10.   Every board should consider whether or not its size, diversity and demographics make it effective. 

      2.1.11.   The board must identify key risk areas and key performance indicators of the business enterprise.  These should be regularly monitored, with particular attention given to technology and systems.

      2.1.12.   The board should identify and monitor the non-financial aspects relevant to the business of the company.

      2.1.13.   The board should record the facts and assumptions on which it relies to conclude that the business will continue as a going concern in the financial year ahead or why it will not, and in that case, what steps the board is taking to remedy the situation.  

      2.1.14.   The board should ensure that each item of special business included in the notice of the annual general meeting, or any other shareowners’ meeting, is accompanied by a full explanation of the effects of any proposed resolutions.

      2.1.15.   The board should encourage shareowners to attend annual general meetings and other company meetings, at which the directors should be present.  More particularly, the chairpersons of each of the board’s committees, especially the audit and remuneration committees, should be present at the annual general meeting.

      2.1.16.   A brief CV of each director standing for election or re-election at the annual general meeting should accompany the notice contained in the annual report.

      2.1.17.   Every board should have a charter setting out its responsibilities, which should be disclosed in its annual report.  At a minimum, the charter should confirm the board’s responsibility for the adoption of strategic plans, monitoring of operational performance and management, determination of policy and processes to ensure the integrity of the company’s risk management and internal controls, communications policy, and director selection, orientation and evaluation.

      2.1.18.   The board must find the correct balance between conforming with governance constraints and performing in an entrepreneurial way.
2.2. Board Composition

      2.2.1.   Companies should be headed by an effective board that can both lead and control the company.  The board should comprise a balance of executive and non-executive directors, preferably with a majority of non-executive directors, of whom sufficient should be independent of management so that shareowner interests (including minority interests) can be protected.  An obvious consideration for South African companies would be to consider the demographics in relation to the composition of the board.  

      2.2.2.   Procedures for appointments to the board should be formal and transparent, and a matter for the board as a whole, assisted where appropriate by a nomination committee.  This committee should constitute only non-executive directors, of whom the majority should be independent, and be chaired by the board chairperson. 

      2.2.3.   Board continuity, subject to performance and eligibility for re-election, is imperative, and a programme ensuring a staggered rotation of directors should be put in place by the board to the extent that this is not already regulated.
2.3. Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer

      2.3.1.   There should be a clearly accepted division of responsibilities at the head of the company, to ensure a balance of power and authority, such that no one individual has unfettered powers of decision-making.  

      2.3.2.   The chairperson should preferably be an independent non-executive director.

      2.3.3.   Given the strategic operational role of the chief executive officer, this function should be separate from that of the chairperson.

      2.3.4.   Where the roles of the chairperson and chief executive officer are combined, there should be either an independent non-executive director serving as deputy chairperson or a strong independent non-executive director element on the board.  Any such decision to combine roles should be justified each year in the company’s annual report.

      2.3.5.   The board should appraise performance of the chairperson on an annual or such other basis as the board may determine.  If the roles of chairperson and chief executive officer are combined, then the independent deputy chairperson should play a leading part in the evaluation process.  

      2.3.6.   The chairperson, or a sub-committee appointed by the board, should appraise the performance of the chief executive officer.  The board should satisfy itself that an appraisal of the chief executive officer is performed at least annually.  The results of such appraisal should also be considered by the Remuneration Committee to guide it in its evaluation of the performance and remuneration of the chief executive officer.
2.4. Directors

      2.4.1.   The board should ensure that there is an appropriate balance of power and authority on the board, such that no one individual or block of individuals can dominate the board’s decision taking.

      2.4.2.   Non-executive directors should be individuals of calibre and credibility, and have the necessary skill and experience to bring judgment to bear independent of management, on issues of strategy, performance, resources, transformation, diversity and employment equity, standards of conduct and evaluation of performance.

      2.4.3.   In the annual report, the capacity of the directors should be categorised as follows:
• Executive director - an individual who is involved in the day-to-day management and/or is in full time salaried employment of the company and/or any of its subsidiaries.
• Non-executive director - an individual not involved in the day to day management and not a full-time salaried employee of the company or of its subsidiaries.  An individual in the full-time employment of the holding company or its subsidiaries, other than the company concerned, would also be considered to be a non-executive director unless such individual by his/her conduct or executive authority could be construed to be directing the day to day management of the company and its subsidiaries.
• Independent director - is a non-executive director who:
(i) is not a representative of a shareowner who has the ability to control or significantly influence management; 
(ii) has not been employed by the company or the group of which it currently forms part, in any executive capacity for the preceding three financial years;
(iii) is not a member of the immediate family of an individual who is, or has been in any of the past three financial years, employed by the company or the group in an executive capacity;
(iv) is not a professional advisor to the company or the group, other than in a director capacity;
(v) is not a significant supplier to, or customer of  the company or group; 
(vi) has no significant contractual relationship with the company or group; and
(vii) is free from any business or other relationship which could be seen to materially interfere with the individual’s capacity to act in an independent manner.

      2.4.4.   A “shadow director” is considered to be a person in accordance with whose directions or instructions (whether they extend over the whole or part of the activities of the company) the directors of the company are accustomed to act.  Shadow directors should be discouraged.  

      2.4.5.   Executive directors should be encouraged to hold other non-executive directorships only to the extent that these do not interfere with their immediate management responsibilities.  Non-executive directors should carefully consider the number of appointments they take in that capacity so as to ensure that the companies on which they serve enjoy the full benefit of their expertise, experience and knowledge.

      2.4.6.   The board should establish a formal orientation programme to familiarise incoming directors with the company’s operations, senior management and its business environment, and to induct them in their fiduciary duties and responsibilities.  Directors should receive further briefings from time to time on relevant new laws and regulations as well as on changing commercial risks.

      2.4.7.   New directors with no or limited board experience should receive development and education to inform them of their duties, responsibilities, powers and potential liabilities.

      2.4.8.   Boards should ascertain whether potential new directors are fit and proper and are not disqualified from being directors.  Prior to their appointment, their backgrounds should be investigated along the lines of the approach required for listed companies by the JSE and under the Banks Act.  The nomination committee would prove useful for this purpose.
2.5. Remuneration

      2.5.1.   Levels of remuneration should be sufficient to attract, retain and motivate executives of the quality required by the board.

      2.5.2.   Companies should appoint a remuneration committee or such other appropriate board committee, consisting entirely or mainly of independent non-executive directors, to make recommendations to the board within agreed terms of reference on the company’s framework of executive remuneration and to determine specific remuneration packages for each of the executive directors.  This is, ultimately, the responsibility of the board.  This committee must be chaired by an independent non-executive director.  In order to obtain his or her input on the remuneration of the other executives the committee should consult the chief executive officer, who may attend meetings by invitation.  However, a chief executive should play no part in decisions regarding his/her own remuneration.

      2.5.3.   Membership of the remuneration committee or board committee that considers executive remuneration, must be disclosed in the annual report and the chairperson of such committee should attend annual general meetings to answer any questions from shareowners.

      2.5.4.   Companies should provide full disclosure of director remuneration on an individual basis, giving details of earnings, share options, restraint payments and all other benefits.

      2.5.5.   Performance-related elements of remuneration should constitute a substantial portion of the total remuneration package of executives in order to align their interests with those of the shareowners, and should be designed to provide incentives to perform at the highest operational standards.

      2.5.6.   Share options may be granted to non-executive directors but must be the subject of prior approval of shareowners (usually at the annual general meeting) having regard also to the specific requirements of the Companies Act.  Because of the apparent dilution of independence, in some international markets the view is that non-executive directors should preferably receive shares rather than share options.  

      2.5.7.   In regard to the allocation of share options, boards should be mindful of the following:
• A vesting period in relation to the allocation of share options to non-executive directors should be applied to dissuade short-term decision taking, but should also have regard to the possibility or consequences of the removal or resignation of such directors prior to the vesting period maturing and any perceived impact on their independence.
• Where it is proposed to re-price share options, this should be the subject of prior shareowner approval.  Details of the share options of each executive and non-executive director who stands to benefit from any such proposal should be provided and should be subject to shareowner approval individually for each director.
• If share options are to be issued at a discount to the ruling price, shareowners should vote separately on this clause in the trust deed at its inception. Any subsequent amendments proposed to an existing trust deed that would permit allocations of share options at a discount must be subject to the specific approval of shareowners. 

      2.5.8.   The overriding principle of full disclosure by directors, on an individual basis, should apply to all share schemes and any other incentive schemes proposed by management.

      2.5.9.   It is not considered appropriate that an executive director’s fixed-term service contract, if any, should exceed three years.  If so, full disclosure of this fact with reasons should be given and the consent of shareowners should be obtained.

      2.5.10.   Companies should establish a formal and transparent procedure for developing a policy on executive and director remuneration which should be supported by a Statement of Remuneration Philosophy in the annual report.  

      2.5.11.   The remuneration or such other similar board committee should play an integral part in the succession planning, particularly in respect of the chief executive officer and executive management.  

      2.5.12.   The remuneration committee should consider, and recommend to the board the fees to be paid to each non-executive director.  The proposed fees, as confirmed by the board, should be submitted to the shareowners in general meeting for approval prior to implementation and payment.  The practice of paying non-uniform fees to non-executive directors should also be carefully considered.  The level of fees should preferably be determined according to the relative contributions of each non-executive director and their participation in the activities of the board and its committees.
2.6. Board Meetings

      2.6.1.   The board should meet regularly, at least once a quarter if not more frequently as circumstances require, and should disclose in the annual report the number of board and committee meetings held in the year and the details of attendance of each director (as applicable).

      2.6.2.   Efficient and timely methods should be determined for informing and briefing board members prior to meetings while each board member is responsible for being satisfied that, objectively, they have been furnished with all the relevant information and facts before making a decision.

      2.6.3.   Non-executive directors should have access to management and may even meet separately with management, without the attendance of executive directors.  This should, however, be agreed collectively by the board usually facilitated by the non-executive chairperson or lead independent non-executive director.

      2.6.4.   The board should regularly review processes and procedures to ensure the effectiveness of the company’s internal systems of control, so that its decision-making capability and the accuracy of its reporting are maintained at a high level at all times.

      2.6.5.   The board should ensure that it receives relevant non-financial information going beyond assessing the financial and quantitative performance of the company, and should look at other qualitative performance factors that involve broader stakeholder interests.
2.7. Board Committees

      2.7.1.   Board committees are an aid to assist the board and its directors in discharging their duties and responsibilities, and boards cannot shield behind these committees (see 2.1.1).

      2.7.2.   There should be a formal procedure for certain functions of the board to be delegated, describing the extent of such delegation, to enable the board to properly discharge its duties and responsibilities and to effectively fulfil its decision taking process.

      2.7.3.   Board committees with formally determined terms of reference, life span, role and function constitute an important element of the process in 2.7.2 and should be established with clearly agreed upon reporting procedures and written scope of authority.

      2.7.4.   As a general principle, there should be transparency and full disclosure from the board committee to the board, except where the committee has been mandated otherwise by the board.

      2.7.5.   At a minimum, each board should have an audit and a remuneration committee.  Industry and company specific issues will dictate the requirement for other committees.

      2.7.6.   Non-executive directors must play an important role in board committees.

      2.7.7.   All board committees should preferably be chaired by an independent non-executive director, whether this is the board chairperson or some other appropriate individual.  Exceptions should be a board committee fulfilling an executive function.

      2.7.8.   Board committees should be free to take independent outside professional advice as and when necessary.

      2.7.9.   Committee composition, a brief description of its remit, the number of meetings held and other relevant information should be disclosed in the annual report.  The chairpersons of the board committees, particularly those in respect of audit, remuneration and nomination, should attend the company’s annual general meeting.

      2.7.10.   Board committees should be subject to regular evaluation by the board to ascertain their performance and effectiveness (see 2.8.1).
2.8. Board and Director Evaluation

      2.8.1.   The board, through its nomination committee or similar board committee, should regularly review its required mix of skills and experience and other qualities such as its demographics and diversity in order to assess the effectiveness of the board.  This should be by means of a self-evaluation of the board as a whole, its committees and the contribution of each individual director.

      2.8.2.   The evaluations in 2.8.1 should be conducted at least annually.
2.9. Dealings and Securities

      2.9.1.   Every listed company should have a practice prohibiting dealing in its securities by directors, officers and other selected employees for a designated period preceding the announcement of its financial results or in any other period considered sensitive, and have regard to the listings requirements of the JSE in respect of dealings of directors.

      2.9.2.   The practice in 2.9.1 should be determined by way of a formal policy established by the board and implemented by the company secretary.
2.10. Company Secretary

      2.10.1.   The company secretary, through the board, has a pivotal role to play in the corporate governance of a company. 

      2.10.2.   The board should be cognisant of the duties imposed upon the company secretary and should empower the company secretary accordingly to enable him or her to properly fulfil those duties.

      2.10.3.   In addition to extensive statutory duties, the company secretary must provide the board as a whole and directors individually with detailed guidance as to how their responsibilities should be properly discharged in the best interests of the company.

      2.10.4.   The company secretary has an important role in the induction of new or inexperienced directors, and in assisting the chairperson and chief executive officer in determining the annual board plan and the administration of other issues of a strategic nature at the board level.

      2.10.5.   The company secretary should provide a central source of guidance and advice to the board, and within the company, on matters of ethics and good governance.

      2.10.6.   The Company secretary should be subjected to a fit and proper test in the same manner as is recommended for new director appointments under 2.4.8. 
 3. Risk Management
3.1. Responsibility

      3.1.1.   The board is responsible for the total process of risk management, as well as for forming its own opinion on the effectiveness of the process.  Management is accountable to the board for designing, implementing and monitoring the process of risk management and integrating it into the day-to-day activities of the company.

      3.1.2.   The board should set the risk strategy policies in liaison with the executive directors and senior management.  These policies should be clearly communicated to all employees to ensure that the risk strategy is incorporated into the language and culture of the company.

      3.1.3.   The board must decide the company’s appetite or tolerance for risk - those risks it will take and those it will not take in the pursuit of its goals and objectives.  The board has the responsibility to ensure that the company has implemented an effective ongoing process to identify risk, to measure its potential impact against a broad set of assumptions, and then to activate what is necessary to proactively manage these risks.

      3.1.4.   The board should make use of generally recognised risk management and internal control models and frameworks in order to maintain a sound system of risk management and internal control to provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of organisational objectives with respect to:
• effectiveness and efficiency of operations;
• safeguarding of the company’s assets (including information);
• compliance with applicable laws, regulations and supervisory requirements;
• supporting business sustainability under normal as well as adverse operating conditions;
• reliability of reporting; and
• behaving responsibly towards all stakeholders.

      3.1.5.   The board is responsible for ensuring that a systematic, documented assessment of the processes and outcomes surrounding key risks is undertaken, at least annually, for the purpose of making its public statement on risk management.  It should, at appropriately considered intervals, receive and review reports on the risk management process in the company.  This risk assessment should address the company’s exposure to at least the following:
• physical and operational risks; 
• human resource risks;
• technology risks; 
• business continuity and disaster recovery;
• credit and market risks; and 
• compliance risks.

      3.1.6.   A board committee, either a dedicated committee or one with other responsibilities, should be appointed to assist the board in reviewing the risk management process and the significant risks facing the company.

      3.1.7.   Risk management and internal control should be practiced throughout the company by all staff, and should be embedded in day-to-day activities.

      3.1.8.   In addition to the company’s other compliance and enforcement activities, the board should consider the need for a confidential reporting process (“whistleblowing”) covering fraud and other risks.
3.2. Application and Reporting

      3.2.1.   A comprehensive system of control should be established by the board to ensure that risks are mitigated and that the company’s objectives are attained.  The control environment should also set the tone of the company and cover ethical values, management’s philosophy and the competence of employees.

      3.2.2.   Risks should be assessed on an on-going basis and control activities should be designed to respond to risks throughout the company.  Pertinent information arising from the risk assessment, and relating to control activities should be identified, captured and communicated in a form and timeframe that enables employees to carry out their responsibilities properly.  These controls should be monitored by both line management and assurance providers.

      3.2.3.   Companies should develop a system of risk management and internal control that builds more robust business operations.  The systems should demonstrate that the company’s key risks are being managed in a way that enhances shareowners’ and relevant stakeholders’ interests.  The system should incorporate mechanisms to deliver: 
• a demonstrable system of dynamic risk identification;
• a commitment by management to the process;
• a demonstrable system of risk mitigation activities;
• a system of documented risk communications;
• a system of documenting the costs of non-compliance and losses;
• a documented system of internal control and risk management; 
• an alignment of assurance of efforts to the risk profile; and
• a register of key risks that could affect shareowner and relevant stakeholder interests.

      3.2.4.   The board must identify key risk areas and key performance indicators of the company, and monitor these factors as part of a regular review of processes and procedures to ensure the effectiveness of its internal systems of control, so that its decision-making and the accuracy of its reporting are maintained at a high level at all times. 

      3.2.5.   Reports from management to the board should provide a balanced assessment of significant risks and the effectiveness of the system of internal control in managing those risks.  Any significant control failings or weaknesses identified should be covered in the reports, including the impact that they have had, or may have had, on the company and the actions being taken to rectify them.

      3.2.6.   The board is responsible for disclosures in relation to risk management and should, at a minimum disclose: 
• that it is accountable for the process of risk management and the system of internal control, which is regularly reviewed for effectiveness and for establishing appropriate risk and control policies and communicating these throughout the company;
• that there is an ongoing process for identifying, evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the company, that has been in place for the year under review and up to the date of approval of the annual report and financial statements;
• that there is an adequate system of internal control in place to mitigate the significant risks faced by the company to an acceptable level.  Such a system is designed to manage, rather than eliminate, the risk of failure or maximise opportunities to achieve business objectives.  This can only provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance;
• that there is a documented and tested process in place that will allow the company to continue its critical business processes in the event of a disastrous incident impacting on its activities;
• where material joint ventures and associates have not been dealt with as part of the group for the purposes of applying these recommendations.  Alternative sources of risk management and internal control assurance applied to these activities should be disclosed, where these exist;
• that any additional information in the annual report to assist understanding of the company’s risk management processes and system of internal control should be provided as appropriate;  and
• where the board cannot make any of the disclosures set out above, it should state this fact and provide a suitable explanation.

      3.2.7.   Risk should not only be viewed from a negative perspective.  The review process may identify areas of opportunity, such as where effective risk management can be turned to competitive advantage.
 4. Internal Audit
4.1. Status and Role

      4.1.1.   Companies should have an effective internal audit function that has the respect and co-operation of both the board and management.  Where the board, in its discretion, decides not to establish an internal audit function, full reasons must be disclosed in the company’s annual report, with an explanation as to how assurance of effective internal controls, processes and systems will be obtained.

      4.1.2.   Consistent with the Institute of Internal Auditors’ (“IIA”) definition of internal auditing in an internal audit charter approved by the board, the purpose, authority and responsibility of the internal audit activity should be formally defined.

      4.1.3.   The IIA has succinctly set out the role and function of internal audit in its Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing, including the code of ethics and the definition of internal audit, which is fully endorsed by the King Committee.

      4.1.4.   Internal audit should report at a level within the company that allows it to fully accomplish its responsibilities.  The head of internal audit should report administratively to the chief executive officer, and should have ready and regular access to the chairperson of the company and the chairperson of the audit committee.

      4.1.5.   Internal audit should report at all audit committee meetings. 

      4.1.6.   The appointment or dismissal of the head of the internal audit should be with the concurrence of the audit committee.

      4.1.7.   If the external and internal audit functions are carried out by the same accounting firm, the audit committee and the board should satisfy themselves that there is adequate segregation between the two functions in order to ensure that their independence is not impaired (see also 6.1.5).
4.2. Scope of Internal Audit

      4.2.1.   Internal audit is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity to add value and improve a company’s operations.  It helps a company accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance processes.

      4.2.2.   An effective internal audit function should provide:
• assurance that the management processes are adequate to identify and monitor significant risks;
• confirmation of the effective operation of the established internal control systems;
• credible processes for feedback on risk management and assurance; and
• objective confirmation that the board receives the right quality of assurance and information from management and that this information is reliable.

      4.2.3.   The internal audit plan should be based on risk assessment as well as on issues highlighted by the audit committee and senior management.  The risk assessment process should be of a continuous nature as to identify not only residual or existing but emerging risks and should be conducted formally at least annually, but more often in complex organisations.  This risk assessment should be co-ordinated with the board’s own assessment of risk.

      4.2.4.   The audit committee should approve the internal audit work plan.

      4.2.5.   The internal audit function should co-ordinate with other internal and external providers of assurance to ensure proper coverage of financial, operational and compliance controls and to minimise duplication of effort.
 5. Integrated Sustainability Reporting
5.1. Sustainability Reporting

      5.1.1.   Every company should report at least annually on the nature and extent of its social, transformation, ethical, safety, health and environmental management policies and practices.  The board must determine what is relevant for disclosure, having regard to the company’s particular circumstances.  

      5.1.2.   Stakeholder reporting requires an integrated approach.  This would be best achieved gradually as the board and the company develop an understanding of the intricate relationships and issues associated with stakeholder reporting.  Companies should categorise issues into the following levels of reporting:
• First level would be disclosures relating to acceptance and adoption of business principles and/or codes of practice that can be verified by reference to documents, board minutes or established policies and standards.
• Second level should address the implementation of practices in keeping with accepted principles involving a review of steps taken to encourage adherence to these principles evidenced by board directors, designated policies and communiqués, supported by appropriate non-financial accounting mechanisms.
• Third level should involve investigation and demonstration of changes and benefits that have resulted from the adoption and implementation of stated business principles and/or codes of practice.

      5.1.3.   When making such disclosures, boards will be required to consider:
• clarity on the nature of the disclosing entity, the scope of issues subject to disclosure, performance expectations as an integral aspect of the “going concern” concept, the period under review and the extent to which items disclosed are directly attributable to the company’s own action or inaction;
• that disclosure of non-financial information is governed by the principles of reliability, relevance, clarity, comparability, timeliness and verifiability (with reference to the Global Reporting Initiative Sustainability Reporting Guidelines on economic, environmental and social performance); and
• that criteria and guidelines for materiality are developed by each company for consistency (having regard for international models and guidelines, as well as national statutory definitions).

      5.1.4.   Matters requiring specific consideration should include:
• description of practices reflecting a committed effort to reducing workplace accidents, fatalities, and occupational health and safety incidents against stated measurement targets and objectives and a suitable explanation where appropriate.  This would cover the nature and extent of the strategy, plan and policies adopted to address and manage the potential impact of HIV/AIDS on the company’s activities; 
• reporting on environmental corporate governance that must reflect current South African law by the application of the “Best Practicable Environmental Option” standard (defined as that option that has most benefit, or causes the least damage to the environment at a cost acceptable to society);
• policies that define social investment prioritisation and spending, and the extent of initiatives to support black economic empowerment, in particular procurement practices and investment strategies; and
• disclosure of human capital development in areas such as the number of staff (with a particular focus on progress against equity targets, achievement of corporate training and development initiatives, age, employee development and financial investment committed).  This should also address issues that create the conditions and opportunities for previously disadvantaged individuals (in particular women) to have an equal opportunity to reach executive levels in the company and to realise their full potential.  It should include progress made in this regard, and mechanisms to positively reinforce the richness of diversity and the added value and contribution from this diversity.
5.2. Organisational Integrity / Code of Ethics

      5.2.1.   Every company should engage its stakeholders in determining the company’s standards of ethical behaviour.  It should demonstrate its commitment to organisational integrity by codifying its standards in a code of ethics.

      5.2.2.   Each company should demonstrate its commitment to its code of ethics by:
• creating systems and procedures to introduce, monitor and enforce its ethical code;
• assigning high level individuals to oversee compliance to the ethical code;
• assessing the integrity of new appointees in the selection and promotion procedures;
• exercising due care in delegating discretionary authority;
• communicating with, and training, all employees regarding enterprise values, standards and compliance procedures;
• providing, monitoring and auditing safe systems for reporting of unethical or risky behaviour; 
• enforcing appropriate discipline with consistency; and
• responding to offences and preventing re-occurrence.

      5.2.3.   Disclosure should be made of adherence to the company’s code of ethics against the above criteria.  The disclosure should include a statement as to the extent the directors believe the ethical standards and the above criteria are being met.  If this is considered inadequate there should be further disclosure of how the desired end-state will be achieved.

      5.2.4.   Companies should strongly consider their dealings with individuals or entities not demonstrating its same level of commitment to organisational integrity.
 6. Accounting and Auditing
6.1. Auditing and Non-audit Services

      6.1.1.   The audit committee should draw up a recommendation to the board for consideration and acceptance by the shareowners for the appointment of the external auditors.  

      6.1.2.   The auditors should observe the highest level of business and professional ethics and in particular, their independence must not be impaired in any way.

      6.1.3.   Companies should aim for efficient audit processes using external auditors in combination with the internal audit function. 

      6.1.4.   Management should encourage consultation between external and internal auditors.  Co-ordination of efforts involves periodic meetings to discuss matters of mutual interest, the exchange of working papers and management letters and reports, and a common understanding of audit techniques, methods and terminology.

      6.1.5.   The audit committee should set the principles for recommending using the accounting firm of the external auditors for non-audit services.  In addition to the related Companies Act requirement, there should be separate disclosure of the amount paid for non-audit services with a detailed description in the notes to the annual financial statements of the nature thereof together with the amounts paid for each of the services described.  
6.2. Reporting of Financial and Non-financial Information

      6.2.1.   The audit committee should consider whether or not an interim report should be subject to an independent review by the external auditor. 

      6.2.2   In the case of an independent review, the audit committee’s report commenting on an interim report and the auditors’ review report, should be tabled at the board meeting held to adopt the interim report.  Where an independent review was not conducted, the audit committee should table the reasons at the board meeting.

      6.2.3.   The board should minute the facts and assumptions used in the assessment of the going concern status of the company at the year end.

      6.2.4.   At the interim reporting stage, the directors should consider their assessment at the previous year end of the company’s ability to continue as a going concern and determine whether or not any of the significant factors in the assessment have changed to such an extent that the appropriateness of the going concern assumption at the interim reporting stage has been affected.  The board should minute the conclusion reached by the directors at the interim reporting stage. 

      6.2.5.   Where non-financial aspects of reporting have been subject to external validation, this fact must be stated and details provided in the annual report.

      6.2.6.   Companies should make every effort to ensure that information is distributed via a broad range of communication channels, including the Internet, having regard for its security and integrity while bearing in mind the need that critical financial information reaches all shareowners simultaneously.
6.3. Audit Committee

      6.3.1.   The board should appoint an audit committee that has a majority of independent non-executive directors. The majority of the members of the audit committee should be financially literate.

      6.3.2.   The chairperson should be an independent non-executive director and not the chairperson of the board.  The better view is that the board chairperson should not be a member of the audit committee at all, but could be invited to attend meetings as necessary by the chairperson of that committee.  The board should consider whether or not it is desirable for the chief executive officer to be a member of the audit committee, or to attend only by invitation.

      6.3.3.   The audit committee should have written terms of reference that deal adequately with its membership, authority and duties.  

      6.3.4.   Companies should, in their annual report disclose whether or not the audit committee has adopted formal terms of reference and, if so, whether the committee has satisfied its responsibilities for the year, in compliance with its terms of reference.

      6.3.5.   Membership of the audit committee should be disclosed in the annual report.  The chairperson of the committee should be available at the annual general meeting to answer questions about its work.
 7. Relations with Shareowners
7.1. Companies should be ready where practicable, to enter into dialogue with institutional investors based on constructive engagement and the mutual understanding of objectives.  This should take due regard of statutory, regulatory and other directives regulating the dissemination of information by companies and their directors and officers.
7.2. When evaluating a company’s corporate governance arrangements, particularly those relating to board structure and composition, institutional investors should give due weight to all relevant factors drawn to their attention and to any specific arrangements to eliminate unnecessary variations in criteria and measurement of performance.
7.3. Companies should ensure that each item of special business included in the notice of annual general meeting is accompanied by a full explanation of the effects of a proposed resolution.  In the course of the annual general meeting, as should be the case with other shareowner meetings, the chairperson should provide a reasonable time for discussion.
7.4. Companies should consider conducting meetings on the basis of a poll in relation to special business, or where contentious issues are under consideration, in order to ensure that all votes of shareowners (whether in person, by proxy or representation) at company meetings are taken into account.  The results of all decisions taken at company meetings should be publicly disseminated in the most appropriate form, immediately on conclusion of the meeting to ensure that all shareowners (particularly those who were not in attendance or were unable to attend) are promptly informed or at least have ready access to such information.
 8. Communication
8.1. It is the board’s duty to present a balanced and understandable assessment of the company’s position in reporting to stakeholders.  The quality of the information must be based on the principles of openness and substance over form.  Reporting should address material matters of significant interest and concern to all stakeholders.
8.2. Reports and communications must be made in the context that society now demands greater transparency and accountability from companies regarding their non-financial matters.
8.3. Reports should present a comprehensive and objective assessment of the activities of the company so that shareowners and relevant stakeholders with a legitimate interest in the company’s affairs can obtain a full, fair and honest account of its performance.  In communicating with its stakeholders, the board should take into account the circumstances of the communities in which the company operates.
8.4. The directors should report on the following matters in their annual report:

      8.4.1.   that it is the directors’ responsibility to prepare financial statements that fairly present the state of affairs of the company as at the end of the financial year and the profit or loss and cash flows for that period;

      8.4.2.   that the auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the financial statements are fairly presented;

      8.4.3.   that adequate accounting records and an effective system of internal controls and risk management have been maintained;

      8.4.4.   that appropriate accounting policies supported by reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates have been used consistently;

      8.4.5.   that applicable accounting standards have been adhered to or, if there has been any departure in the interest of fair presentation, this must not only be disclosed and explained but quantified;

      8.4.6.   that there is no reason to believe the business will not be a going concern in the year ahead or an explanation of any reasons otherwise; and

      8.4.7.   that the Code of Corporate Practices and Conduct has been adhered to or, if not, where there has not been compliance to give reasons.
 9. Implementation of the Code

   All boards and individual directors have a duty and responsibility to ensure that the principles set out in this Code are observed.


End of Document
Code of Corporate Practices and Conduct
Page 2 of 3


